Journal of Applied Psychology
© 2020 American Psychological Association
ISSN: 0021-9010

2020, Vol. 105, No. 10, 1088 –1100
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/apl0000832

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

From Zero to Hero: An Exploratory Study Examining Sudden Hero Status
Among Nonphysician Health Care Workers During the
COVID-19 Pandemic
Sophie Hennekam

Jamie Ladge

Audencia Business School

Northeastern University and University of Exeter Business
School

Yuliya Shymko
Audencia Business School
The recent COVID-19 pandemic has raised the visibility of health care workers to the level of public
heroes. We study this phenomenon by exploring how nonphysician health care workers, who traditionally
believed they were invisible and undervalued, perceive their newfound elevated status during the
pandemic. Drawing from a qualitative study of 164 health care workers, we find that participants
interpreted the sudden visibility and social valorization of their work as temporary and treated it with
skepticism, incredulity, and as devoid of genuinely transformative power. We seek to contribute to the
recent call to develop novel approaches to understanding the contours of the paradoxical nature of
invisibility in the workplace by offering insights into what makes “invisible” workers accept or reject
publicly driven elevation in their sudden social valorization.
Keywords: COVID-19 pandemic, social valorization of work, invisibility, health care, temporality

search shows that other health care workers encounter similar challenges. For example, research has reported on the lack of status of
midwives (Day-Stirk & Fauveau, 2012), the need for training for
orderlies (Arnon, Ben-Arye, Attias, Levy, & Schiff, 2018), stress and
exhaustion among hospital attendants (Bouillerce & Stoiber, 2018),
and the invisibility of janitorial staff (Messing, 1998; Rabelo &
Mahalingam, 2019).
Despite the documented social marginalization of nonphysician
health care workers inside (Brunetto et al., 2013) and outside their
professional environments (Macdonald & Merrill, 2002), the
COVID-19 pandemic has radically changed their condition of
invisibility by putting all health care employees under the spotlight
of public attention and high praise. The outpouring of support for
their efforts during the pandemic has recast health care staff across
all organizational ranks as “essential workers” and elevated them
to the position of “heroes” (Booth, Adam, & Rolfe, 2020). This
testimony of public recognition has not only come in the form of
symbolic gestures of appreciation, such as rounds of applause
(L’Express, 2020), mural paintings (McCann, Landau, & Mahieus,
2020), and “honk for heroes” parades (Booth et al., 2020); it has
also been manifested in material support for workers from nonprofit and for-profit organizations through food donations, airline
tickets for future travel, and salary increases from the government
in the form of “hazard pay” vouchers (Allen, 2020).
Given the unprecedented nature of this shift in public perception
of the social value of care work, we are interested in studying how
nonphysician health care workers experienced and responded to
their newfound and sudden visibility. Specifically, we seek to
investigate how they experienced the social valorization of their

In the health care sector, physicians are generally considered to
be higher status than nonphysicians, making them highly visible
and prominent within the health care system (Nembhard & Edmondson, 2006). As such, nonphysician health care workers often
regard themselves and their work as invisible (Allen, 2014) and
undervalued (Hewko et al., 2015). Indeed, the literature points to
common issues associated with the perceived lower status within the
organizational hierarchy that nonphysician health care workers face.
These issues include economic vulnerability (Hartz & Wright, 2019),
workplace bullying (Ariza-Montes, Muniz, Montero-Simó, &
Araque-Padilla, 2013), a dearth of promotional prospects (Dill, Morgan, & Weiner, 2014), high workload, stress, difficult working conditions, and a lack of resources (Jones, Hocine, Salomon, Dab, &
Temime, 2015). Although nurses have been studied extensively, re-

This article was published Online First September 7, 2020.
Sophie Hennekam, Department of Management, Audencia Business
School; X Jamie Ladge, Management and Organizational Development
Group, D’Amore-McKim School of Business, Northeastern University,
and Department of Management, University of Exeter Business School;
Yuliya Shymko, Department of Management, Audencia Business School.
The authors are listed in alphabetic order and have contributed equally
to the article.
We acknowledge the tireless efforts of our participants and all health care
workers for their everyday heroism. Authors declare no conflict of interest.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Jamie
Ladge, Management and Organizational Development Group, D’AmoreMcKim School of Business, Northeastern University, 112 Hayden Hall,
Boston, MA 02115. E-mail: j.ladge@northeastern.edu
1088

SUDDEN HERO STATUS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

work during the pandemic and their reactions to status elevation.
We define social valorization as a process of mobilizing socially
constructed attitudes in the collective elevation of the value and
image of certain types of work (and the individuals performing it)
that are traditionally devalued (Wolfensberger & Thomas, 2005).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: first, we present an
overview of the current research on occupational invisibility and
its social triggers; we then move to a description of the research
context. Next, we outline our data collection and methodology. We
then present an analysis of our findings and conclude with a
discussion of how our study can enhance theoretical understanding
of invisibility at work and its practical implications.

Invisibility at Work
Invisibility is defined as the experience of the members of a
marginalized group who are overlooked or dismissed by the dominant group in terms of professional authority, potential, and recognition (Smith, Watkins, Ladge, & Carlton, 2019). The current
literature suggests that invisibility is a stable attribute of specific
kinds of work and the workers who perform it and that sudden
visibility is something individuals will appreciate and embrace
(Mahalingam, Jagannathan, & Selvaraj, 2019; Rabelo & Mahalingam, 2019). There are several research streams in distinct
disciplinary domains of the social sciences (e.g., sociology of
work, political philosophy, and business ethics) that focus on
understanding the triggers of invisibility and individual experiences and strategies for coping with this predicament. In our study,
we integrate the existing streams of literature to provide a comprehensive and symbiotic classification of the disparate accounts
of invisibility. Our reading of the existing literature on invisibility
suggests that we cannot make sense of these experiences separate
from a discussion about the forms of their production. Thus,
drawing from prior literature, we offer an original classification,
which distinguishes between task-related (“dirty” work), skillrelated (social value of work), and status-related (position in the
organizational hierarchy) individual experiences of invisibility.
We make further use of this classification in generating secondorder themes in the analysis of our findings.

Task-Related, Skill-Related, and Organizational
Status-Related Invisibility
Task-related conditions of invisibility often refer to dirty work,
which includes occupations that are widely regarded as “physically, socially or morally beneath the dignity of the profession”
(Hughes, 1958, p. 122). Work, and the individuals doing that work,
may become invisible when linked to the performance of tasks that
are stigmatized or degraded (Simpson, Slutskaya, Lewis, & Höpful, 2012), such as cleaning (Mahalingam et al., 2019). Certain
occupations are, often unconsciously, rendered invisible as a result
of sociocultural norms. Indeed, dirty work often has a stigmatizing
effect on workers, particularly for those working in fields involving the handling of refuse, bodily fluids, death, and/or working in
dangerous conditions (Ashforth & Kreiner, 1999). There is an
inherent paradox in occupations that are considered dirty: Although they are perceived as being disgusting and undesirable,
they are simultaneously viewed as necessary for society to function (Douglas, 1966).

1089

Skill-related conditions of invisibility permeate the experiences
of those occupations that fall under the category of “unskilled
labor”—work associated with the performance of activities that
presumably do not require formal training, professional credentials, or vocational expertise (Braverman, 1974; O’Shea, 2019).
For example, several historical studies raised questions about how
the social value of work is constructed based on the perception of
the skills that it requires (Gaskell, 1987). In this context, Vlasses
(1997) drew from research on nurses to describe invisible work as
that which “may or may not be visible but is not recognized . . .
hidden, unrecognized, unaccounted-for or taken-for-granted”
(p. 1). Prior studies have also found that many individuals prefer to
refrain from mentioning work experience at McDonald’s, Amazon
warehouses, or delivery services, as they are afraid of being
perceived as lacking skills for more exigent employment (Shantz
& Booth, 2014). The high degree of automation and the protocolization of labor in the convenience and service economy further
contributes to the denigration of the social value of these occupations (Bronson, 2015; Steinberg, 1990).
Finally, research on organizational structures indicates that an
individual’s position in a workplace hierarchy shapes the condition
of invisibility through power dynamics that divide members into
lower and higher classes (Anderson, 2019). Despite ongoing efforts to democratize workplaces, most contemporary organizations
retain a pyramid of rank and privilege. On the one hand, organizations enable individual fulfillment through the distribution of
opportunities for professional development across various layers
of activities. On the other, the practices of such distribution are
carried out in accordance with the hierarchical principles of recognizing merit and assigning worthiness, thus establishing distinct
regimes of status-related visibility within organizations (Kreiner,
Ashforth, & Sluss, 2006). One’s position within an organizational
hierarchy determines the amount of attention and praise that is attributed to one’s work effort, which further defines access to means such
as autonomy, flexibility, and income that have a major impact on
workers’ well-being. It also affects how organizational members take
into account the reaction and validation of others in determining their
self-esteem and identity in a work context (Ashforth, Kreiner, Clark,
& Fugate, 2007; Dutton, Debebe, & Wrzesniewski, 2016; van
Vuuren, Teurlings, & Bohlmeijer, 2012). For low-status health care
workers, treatment by others, such as coworkers or patients, helps
them determine a sense of their worth and importance (Dutton et al.,
2016; Nembhard & Edmondson, 2006). Indeed, within the health care
sector, power dynamics have an impact on how different workers are
treated. For example, located at the lower layers of the organizational
hierarchy, hospital cleaners report being ignored by doctors or disregarded by patients (Messing, 1998).
In sum, we postulate that invisibility is a predicament that
characterizes types of work associated with lower skills—work
perceived as undignified and performed by employees positioned
at the bottom of organizational hierarchies.

Research Context
This study was conducted in France and focused on nonphysician health care workers who were deemed “essential” during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Nonphysician health care workers include
nurses, hospital attendants, technicians, and other staff who maintain
the safety, cleanliness, and administrative functions within hospital

HENNEKAM, LADGE, AND SHYMKO

1090

settings. Although there is a growing demand in the health care sector
for each of these types of worker due to the aging population (France
Stratégie, 2015), hospitals and other medical facilities struggle to hire
qualified nonphysician health care professionals. The difficult working conditions, intense workload, potential for harassment, lack of
recognition, a dearth of career development opportunities, as well as
low salaries, have been put forward as reasons for the lack of appeal
of these occupations (Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development [OECD], 2020).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Method
Sample
The sample consisted of 164 individuals working in hospitals in
France. Most of these individuals were nurses (51%), hospital attendants (32%), or technicians (7%). The remaining 10% comprised a
range of occupations, as outlined in Table 1. Although we did not
collect demographic data from our participants, we can estimate from
public data that 87% of the nurses, 90% of the hospital attendants, and
77% of the technicians were women with an average age of 40 across
all categories (INSEE, 2020; OECD, 2017).1

Procedure
Our study was exploratory in nature, drawing from qualitative
accounts of nonphysician health care workers who were employed
during the COVID-19 pandemic. We were cognizant of our respondents’ limited availability and consequently devised a short
survey of four open-ended questions to allow individuals to develop their answers in a way that suited them. The survey consisted
of the following questions: (1) What is your occupation? (2) How
do you think your occupation was perceived by society (before
COVID-19)? (3) Do you feel COVID-19 has changed the way
people perceive your occupation and, if so, in what way? (4) Do
you think that COVID-19 will have a long-lasting effect on the
way society values your occupation? Although the study was
conducted at a University without an institutional review board,
American Psychological Association ethical requirements were
followed during data collection.
The survey was put online using Qualtrics (Provo, UT) and two
hospitals in France (one in Paris and one in Rennes) were contacted regarding participation. Participants were told that the aim
Table 1
Breakdown by Occupation of the Study Sample (N ⫽ 164)
Occupation

N

n/%

Nurse
Hospital attendant
Technician
Administrative personnel
Nurse supervisor
Cleaner
Socio-esthetician
Social worker
Physical therapist
Midwife
Occupational therapist
Unknown

84
53
11
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
4

51 (51.2)
32 (32.3)
6 (6.2)
2 (1.8)
1 (1.2)
1 (1.2)
1 (0.6)
1 (0.6)
1 (0.6)
1 (0.6)
1 (0.6)
2 (2.4)

of the study was “to examine whether COVID-19 has changed the
perception of health care professionals who are not physicians.”
The two hospitals were chosen because Paris has been strongly
affected by COVID-19, whereas Rennes is among the least affected regions in France. Both hospitals were willing to participate
and distributed the invitations internally. Two follow-up messages
were sent out to encourage participation. Data collection took
place between March 26, 2020 and April 17, 2020, when cases of
COVID-19 were soaring in France and a nationally mandated
lockdown had been put into effect. During this time, hospitals were
besieged with record numbers of patients in need of care, protective personal equipment supply shortages, and increased distress
and risk of illness among health care workers (Minder & Peltier,
2020). The survey was sent to 333 employees and 180 returned the
survey, constituting a response rate of 54%. We subsequently
eliminated 19 surveys due to incomplete data or because they were
completed by physicians who were inadvertently sent the survey.
Three in-depth interviews were conducted between June 19 and
June 24, 2020 to complement the 161 surveys analyzed.

Data Analysis
We used qualitative, inductive techniques to analyze the data
(Charmaz, 2006; Strauss & Corbin, 1990). First, we read the responses several times to become familiar with the data and to develop
an initial list of common themes. After we had identified several main
themes, we coded the data. This was an iterative process involving
moving back and forth between the data and the literature. We used
a codebook for the codes and subcodes as the coding process advanced. Throughout the process, we added new codes, split some
existing codes, and merged others. We then moved the codes to higher
levels of abstraction, moving away from the words used by the
participants and creating themes that were conceptually meaningful.
We subsequently conducted three additional in-depth interviews with
individuals representing each of the main nonphysician categories
from our sample—a nurse, a hospital attendant, and a technician—to
gain a more complete picture of their unique vantage points, discern
differences across each group, and determine how well our initial
analysis fit their experiences. We provide vignettes of each of these
interviews in the Appendix to highlight similarities and differences in
experiences across nonphysician categories.
Following our primary coding process, we engaged in a secondary coding process to ensure the viability of our final codes and
the overall fit with the data (Kreiner, Hollensbe, & Sheep, 2009).
We enlisted the help of two research assistants, who had previously been trained in qualitative data analysis and NVivo software
but were unfamiliar with the study (QSR International, 2020). We
gave each of the coders the codebook, along with several blocks of
text from the transcribed data representing each of the nonphysician categories. The coders coded the data independently. Using
the coding comparison feature in NVivo, we calculated an average
agreement rate of 94% with a weighted Cohen’s kappa of .72
(Cohen, 1960). Our data structure, illustrated in Figure 1, shows
the relationships between the first-order categories, second-order
1
French law prohibits the collection of any data based on race, ethnicity,
or religion; therefore, the racial/ethnic distribution of our sample could not
be estimated.

SUDDEN HERO STATUS

First-order categories

1091
Second-order
themes

- Perception that the task is unknown or seen as irrelevant.
- Perception that tasks do not involve responsibility.
- Perception that others see their tasks as undignified and dirty.
- Feeling denigrated by patients and/or doctors.

Task-related
invisibility

- Perception of stigma related to occupation or related to being a
government worker.
- Perception that it is a set of simple tasks for which you do not need any
qualifications.
- Perception that the work itself is not valued or that anyone can do this
work.
- Work conducted considered to be invisible, taken for granted, or involves
skills that no one thinks about.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Aggregate
dimensions

Skill-related
invisibility

- Perception of being underpaid.
- Aware of low position in hierarchy/feeling inferior compared to doctors.
- Feeling invisible as an individual.
- Perception of being non-existent, unknown, irrelevant, and ignored.
- Perception that care work is more visible than non-care work.
- Lack of resources and career opportunities/progression.

Normative
experiences
of invisibility

Statusrelated
invisibility

- Feeling they exist in the eyes of others/feeling important/feeling of being
seen/feeling valued.
- Role of the media in this enhanced visibility.

Hypervisibility
triggered by
COVID-19

- Increase in respect, recognition, gratitude, consideration, and admiration.
- Applause, food donations.
- Their work is perceived to be useful, necessary, or essential.
- Statements about who values their work: the government, patients,
colleagues, the public, the media, and/or the directors of the hospital.
- Hospital hierarchy is broken down, social cohesion, and collaboration.

Increase in
respect,
recognition, and
consideration

- Perception that they are valued only as long as they are needed.
- Perception that people show recognition because they have nothing else
to do.
- Comparison with police and fire brigade during attacks, leading to the
expectation that they will be quickly forgotten.
- Perception that the government never keeps its promises.
- Expectation that media attention will decrease and that economic
concerns will take over.
- Belief that current interest is driven by fear.

Temporality of
hero status

- Feeling that nothing has changed/this is everyday life/this is their job.
- Rejection of hero status to protect oneself from being hurt if it doesn’t
last.
- Perception that being called heroes is too much, fake, or insincere.
- Sudden hero status makes them feel objectified, used, manipulated.
- Seeing themselves differently from public perceptions.

Rejection of
hero status

- Recognition is initially appreciated, but ultimately rejected.
- Both accepting and rejecting attitudes toward sudden social valorization.
- Having contradictory or “double” feelings about increased visibility and
social valorization.

Ambivalence
toward hero
status

- Feeling they “finally” exist in the eye of others.
- Perception that they get the recognition they deserve.
- Appreciate feeling important/feel being seen/feeling valued.

Embracing
hero status

Interpreting
sudden hero
status

Reactions to
sudden hero
status

Figure 1. Data analysis structure.

themes, and aggregate theoretical dimensions (Gioia, Corley, &
Hamilton, 2013).

Findings
The findings of our study point to three prevailing themes that
emerged from the data: the normative experiences of workers’ invis-

ibility before COVID-19; their interpretation of the sudden valorization of their activities triggered by the crisis, including the perceived
temporal nature of the elevated status of their occupation; and their
reactions to their newfound hero status. The participants described
different types of invisibility to which they had grown accustomed
and how they were making sense of their sudden hero status considering their normative experiences and in relation to others at work. As

HENNEKAM, LADGE, AND SHYMKO

1092

such, they deemed their hero status as temporary and treated it with
skepticism, incredulity, and as being devoid of genuinely transformative power. We discuss these findings below, supported by quotations
from the participants. Table 2 provides additional quotations for
illustration.

Normative Experiences of Invisibility

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

It was evident from our analysis that feeling invisible was a
common experience among nonphysician health care workers. The

vast majority of those we surveyed reported that their jobs were
devalued, that they felt marginalized, stigmatized, or nonexistent
and they mentioned a lack of respect and recognition. Although
these sentiments were not surprising, given the hierarchical nature
of hospital settings and the power distance from physicians, our
data revealed some differences in the types of invisibility experienced by participants and specified in our original classification of
the previous literature on invisibility. Although all the participants
expressed status-related invisibility, it appeared to be most salient

Table 2
Illustrative Quotations for Aggregate Theoretical Dimensions
Theoretical dimension

Quotation

Normative experiences of invisibility

[Before the COVID-19 pandemic, we were] non-existent. No one ever talked about us. Microbes just
disappear as by magic as we enter a room. So why are we there? (Participant 78, cleaner).
[We are] unknown, forgotten, but an important element in the healthcare system, just like all other
professions (Participant 70, laboratory technician).
We are a forgotten profession. Underestimated compared to nurses. Little hands in the shadow
(Participant 53, hospital attendant).
[My occupation] has a negative reputation. Some people told me: “Ah yes, you clean bottoms”
(Participant 124, hospital attendant)!
[It’s perceived] as a difficult profession, lots of people say they could never do this job. Still, few
people are aware of our daily responsibilities, the downsides of the profession, the lack of resources,
or our remuneration. We are perceived as those little hands that obey the orders of the doctor
(Participant 45, nurse).
[We are] ignored, denigrated, undervalued (Participant 143, hospital attendant).
[I get] a lot of recognition from the neighborhood in the form of presents that they leave at my door as
they hear me leave every morning at dawn. Families also send me emails thanking me (Participant 6,
hospital attendant).
Because of the media and the multiple documentaries on our profession since the outbreak of the
COVID-19, people have become more aware of the importance of all the medical and paramedical
professions and that, without us, the hospital cannot function (Participant 68, hospital attendant).
They value us more, like other “essential” professions right now (Participant 54, nurse).
Once this pandemic is over, this positiveness and recognition will fade and the profession will fall back
in the shadows (Participant 153, nurse).
People are going to forget us quickly and the government even faster (Participant 164, hospital
attendant).
I think that for the moment the profession is in the spotlight but that it will not last . . . Once the
COVID has passed, things will re-establish themselves . . . it is like a fashion effect, our popularity
will be ephemeral (Participant 143, nurse).
Unfortunately, I think people have short memories. At the end of the crisis, people will thank us, then a
few months later they will forget. Many things in history have shown us that Humanity has a short
memory (Participant 124, hospital attendant).
I don’t know . . . In the beginning [we will be more valued], but this will quickly run out of steam.
I’m not sure that at the end of the day we will be valued more, despite all the efforts we’re putting
in right now (Participant 102, nurse).
I think we’ll quickly be forgotten, like the police with the terrorist attacks. People pay attention to
professions that are useful to them at a given moment, so after the crisis, they’ll simply forget us as
we are no longer needed (Participant 130, technician).
The current recognition is a reaction to a temporary phenomenon that appeals to the emotions . . . a
bond of solidarity is tied around this “enemy of the people.” We can therefore expect that this
recognition will reduce over time. Humans have a tendency to forget (Participant 11, nurse).
Healthcare workers are EVERY DAY confronted with distress, fear, suffering, sadness, illness, poverty,
and loneliness. Being a healthcare worker is a choice, but it’s always difficult, not only during the
COVID-19. I think that the majority of people only see those difficulties during this crisis. I don’t
want to be considered as a hero either, because we’re just doing our job, like any other day of the
year (Participant 71, nurse).
I find it rather funny that we’re seen as “heroes” now as our work is the same as usual, under the same
conditions, or even worse. We do our job in exactly the same way, we just have a bit more patients
in a short period of time, but “heroes” as they call us, that’s what we are on a daily basis
(Participant 35, nurse).
We put our lives at risk, we’re perceived as heroes while we just do our work (Participant 135, hospital
attendant).
They treat us like heroes . . . while we just continue to do our job (Participant 82, nurse)!
Today they call us heroes, because they need us more than ever (Participant 80, nurse).

Interpreting sudden hero status

Reacting to hero status

SUDDEN HERO STATUS

among nurses and technicians, who often compared their status
relative to others:
We’re seen as failed doctors, because we’re not intelligent enough to
be doctors, but still come in handy when there’s no doctor around.
(Participant 84, nurse)
No one knows who we are or what we do. They often see us as nurses.
(Participant 38, technician)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Hospital attendants most often expressed all three types of invisibility but emphasized task- and/or skill-related invisibility as most
salient:

1093

Other participants linked an inevitable decay in their status as heroes
to the short attention span of the media, which would seek to explore
and capitalize on new “hot topics” such as the economic crisis and
financial recovery. Finally, for some participants, there were more
prosaic reasons to expect the temporality of their status elevation—in
a rush to go back to “normal” and leave the anxieties and traumas of
the pandemic behind, society will engage in a collective forgetting of
painful experiences, thus inadvertently restoring the pre-crisis values
of individualism. Moreover, the participants explained that they perceived the appreciation of others to be related to the fact that people
were afraid and “needed” them during the pandemic but, once the
sense of urgency and vulnerability evaporates, they will be forgotten:

We’re an element at the hospital that no one sees. No one understands
what functions we have. We’re a bit erased. (Participant 115, hospital
attendant)

Society is individualistic, once their needs are met, people go back
home, and we will be forgotten. (Participant 106, nurse)

We’re seen as professionals that do work you do not want to do.
(Participant 162, hospital attendant)

It seems to me that it is fear that drives people, for the moment it is
still a bit far from us, but implicitly there is the fear of death, our own
or that of our loved ones. This spurs the gratitude for all health care
workers right now. (Participant 1, nurse supervisor)

Differences in the types of invisibility experienced among the
three primary groups of nonphysician health care workers are
outlined in Table 3.

Interpreting Sudden Hero Status
As the media called attention to the “heroism” of health care
workers who were deemed essential, participants reflected on how
the pandemic had changed the way their work was viewed. They
explained that the pandemic had changed the way society perceived their occupations and suddenly made them “hypervisible”:
The pandemic has made our professions more visible and has highlighted its importance. Health care workers are the ramparts against
the virus. (Participant 11, nurse)

Participants were cognizant of the heightened consideration and
sometimes even admiration for them. They reported feeling seen,
acknowledged, and appreciated by others:
There is respect, admiration, and gratitude in the form of applause and
food donations. (Participant 114, hospital attendant)

They interpreted the observed gestures of public support as recognition of the indispensability of their work for society and its
collective well-being:
The media talk a lot about our profession, which is a sign of recognition. It also shows to the public that we are irreplaceable at the
hospital and that we are important for the well-being of the patients
we look after on a daily basis, with or without COVID. (Participant
147, hospital attendant)

However, the participants almost unanimously expected their hero
status to be temporary. They expressed doubt regarding their current
hero status generating a meaningful and lasting change in the valorization of their work. Their skepticism rested on three sets of projections: the problems of technocratic logic in treating care work; the
dwindling of media attention; and persistence of pre-crisis cultural
norms. According to some participants, the economic efficiencydriven logic of health care management would be reinforced after the
lockdown and impede the development of resource allocation
schemes that would be more considerate of their occupational needs.

In addition, they highlighted that the role of health care workers
was highly salient, given the public health crisis and that people
had the time to focus on them. However, they believed that once
the pandemic was over, interest in and appreciation for their work
would quickly fade:
People have time to applaud us because they are at home. They think
of us because they are at home. The government is thinking of us
because it has no choice but to throw flowers at us so that we are ready
to go to work without flinching. But in a few months, everything will
be forgotten. No applause. No salary increase. No revaluation of
professions. (Participant 81, social worker)

In sum, participants believed that their elevated status would be
temporary and that their working conditions, social marginalization, and subjugated organizational position would remain immune
to meaningful modification:
Once the crisis is over, the image people have of our profession will
be again what it was before the COVID: devoted individuals who
accept working under any circumstances “because we love our jobs.”
(Participant 35, nurse)
This brutal recognition is appreciated, but it is simultaneously incomprehensible for most of us whose workload and suffering have been
ignored by our hierarchy and the authorities for too long. This valorization of our work right now will not last, probably. As soon as
society no longer feels in danger, everyone’s interests and the economy will once again become the priority. (Participant 12, nurse)

Reacting to Hero Status
The participants reacted to their hero status either by embracing,
expressing ambivalence, and/or rejecting it outright. Although it
was not the most prevalent response, some participants embraced
their sudden hero status by accentuating its benefits for their social
standing and by making statements about how their enhanced
visibility and social valorization were justified in their eyes. Moreover, they reported that they had finally found a sense of worthiness through recognition and interest from others:
I feel that my work is important and now it finally gets the recognition
it deserves. People finally realize that our work is very meaningful and

HENNEKAM, LADGE, AND SHYMKO

1094

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Table 3
Illustrative Quotations for Second-Order Themes Across Occupational Categories
Occupation

Nurses

Hospital attendants

Technicians

Status-related invisibility

Patients often behave as if they’re
in a hotel without any form of
politeness. We get very little
consideration from patients or
from some surgeons.

Task-related invisibility

People know the profession isn’t
easy, but do not know why
exactly (the rhythm, workload,
lack of human and material
resources).
People think being a nurse is
easy, while it isn’t always easy.
You need a lot of practice and
I think people also overlook the
psychological difficulties.
People believe that nursing is a
profession that anyone can do,
that you do not need any
qualifications for this, while
this is obviously not the case.
We provide a lot of psychological
support to both patients and
their families and all that,
people never think about it. I
think it’s actually a big part of
the job and you need to be able
to handle that, it requires a lot
of social skills, but no one
seems to notice or realize it.
Social skills aren’t valued, it’s
all about your diplomas.
During the pandemic everyone
was clapping, we were
everywhere, on the radio, on
television, on social media, in
the newspaper, every single
person knew about our extreme
efforts.
During the COVID the whole
world suddenly saw us as
heroes, it was a little weird.
You go from being no one, to
being everything in only a few
weeks’ time.
During the pandemic, people
showed so much recognition,
so much consideration.

No respect, both physically and verbally
toward us. I feel like a doormat.
Doctors devalue us . . . they look down
on you and you really feel that
hierarchy, this lower-than feeling
hurts me, because I don’t think it’s
justified.
People think we basically clean poo
from old people.
We’re seen as professionals that do
work you do not want to do.
The work we do is constantly devalued
or taken for granted by patients and
doctors alike.

I can feel lots of technicians are
frustrated about the invisible nature of
their work, they feel overshadowed by
doctors, but also feel that others
perceive their work to be less
important than nurses’ and hospital
attendants’.
People don’t have a clue of what we do.
They do not even know we exist.
They think that a hospital only
consists of individuals who provide
direct care for patients.
People do not even know our
occupation exists. When I say I work
at the hospital, they answer: “you’re a
nurse”.

I want my occupation to be recognized
in terms of our knowledge and skills.
There is this lack of recognition of the
fact that many healthcare workers do
have some level of qualification and
that this is absolutely not seen by
society.
People see it as simple work that
anyone can do and for which you do
not need any qualifications.

Most media do not mention us, because
the radiologists interpret the X-rays
that we make. It’s us who are close to
the patients, who do all the tests.

I suddenly became very visible, like
hypervisible. We were being put in
the spotlights all of a sudden. They
even talked about us in the media.

Since the COVID, the journals finally
talk about us.
We were supervisible, everyone was
constantly asking about how it was to
work at the hospital.

The government and even patients show
a lot more recognition toward the
caring personnel and that feels good.
People finally realize that our work is
very meaningful and useful. So that
was positive, it makes you feel
valued.

We’re getting out of the shadows and
that highlights the importance and
usefulness of our work.
The government has really recognized
our huge efforts. They really showed
their recognition and that feels pretty
good.

Skill-related invisibility

Increase in visibility

Increase in respect,
recognition and
consideration

SUDDEN HERO STATUS

1095

Table 3 (continued)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Occupation

Nurses

Hospital attendants

Technicians

Temporality of hero
status

Our valorization will last as long
as the crisis lasts. Afterwards, I
don’t think there will be any
recognition or a revalorization
of our salaries. Promises are
never kept in France.

The general public will remember, like
usual, the nurses, the hospital
attendants, and the doctors. The other
professions will be quickly forgotten,
especially if the public authorities do
not valorize the profession.
I hope things will change, like everyone
else. Often they [the government] say
a lot of things, but finally nothing
really happens, it’s just words.

Rejection of hero status

I personally didn’t like it, because
we’re paid to do this, we’ve
chosen this career path, so
we’re simply doing our duty.
They think that we are “heroes.”
But actually, this is what we do
every day, certainly on a
smaller scale, but every time
we come to work we save
lives. This is our daily life . . .
So we are not heroes and this
is our job, every day, with or
without COVID.

Embracing hero status

Feeling suddenly respected and
valued is pretty cool and I
think that, although most of us
thought it was too much, we
also appreciated it. Of course
it’s pleasant that the media
talks about your efforts, that
people ask how you’re doing,
that people thank you, that
patients show more patience
and respect also, all this was
definitely cool.
I really got a lot of questions,
which was a little tiring at
some stage. People were
curious, they wanted to know
what my role was, whether it
was hard, whether I worked a
lot. So on the one hand it was
interesting to share this
experience and to tell others
what we’re doing.

I do not think that the COVID will have
a long-lasting effect on the way
society perceives our occupation.
Over time, people always forget.
Take the example of the heroic acts
of the fire brigade and how badly
they were treated in certain suburbs
several months later.
I didn’t expect this hero status to last. I
clearly expected that over time,
people would forget about our
extreme efforts and devotion and that
nothing would change.
We were heroes because people didn’t
really have a choice, they wanted us
to look after all those patients and
one way to encourage people to
continue going to work, while
running the risk of getting this virus
ourselves, is obviously by
overloading us with praise and
compliments, so I think it’s basically
the only thing they could do.
I’m just doing my job. I’m asking for
more recognition, some more
consideration or respect, that’s true,
but that does not make me a hero.
That’s simply a step too far.
I see why they [called us heroes] and I
think that’s pretty accurate.

Ambivalence toward
hero status

Don’t get me wrong, I did appreciate
the recognition, of course, we all do,
but because it felt insincere and
because I’ve been around for long
enough that I did not expect a real
change, that you don’t really enjoy it,
that you’re saying to yourself: look
how kind they are, just because they
need me. It makes you feel even less
human.

useful. So that was positive, it makes you feel valued, so that’s great.
(Participant 163, technician)

This type of response was, however, often followed by a qualifying statement disclosing an ultimate rejection of hero status.
Indeed, although some participants welcomed this sudden
change and enjoyed the elevation of their status, the vast
majority rejected the notion of being a hero. More precisely,
although they initially acknowledged the positive effect of the
increased recognition, they ultimately rejected it, revealing
ambivalence. Ambivalent reactions are thus defined as contradictory statements reflecting both acceptance and rejection:

They were saying, they are heroes, they
are heroes, and that every day. But
we’re treating people every day, so
we could be applauded every day. It
was all of a sudden, we were
suddenly being put in the spotlights,
while we’ve always done what we
were doing. So it was a bit too much.

I think this hero status we got was
justified somehow. We really did put
in a considerable effort, we have
never worked so hard before, we
never gave so much.
We indeed put in a lot of effort, so it
was good that this was being
recognized.

It’s good that our efforts got recognized,
but finally we’re just doing our work,
we’re doing this out of vocation, out
of passion, and not because we’re
seen as heroes.

I found that it was good to see and hear, because we indeed put
in a lot of effort, so it was good that this was being recognized.
But it was a little weird from the side of the media, I felt it was
too much in-your-face, too demonstrative. (Participant 163,
technician)

Given that most of our participants ultimately rejected or expressed ambivalence with regard to their hero status, we decided to
explore further why this was the case, as prior research suggests
invisible workers often desire to be viewed in a positive light
(Ashforth et al., 2007).

HENNEKAM, LADGE, AND SHYMKO

1096

We found that there were three primary responses in terms of the
participants ultimately rejecting their sudden hero status. First, they
did not see their role as having changed. They critically reflected on
the whimsical, exaggerated, and somewhat hypocritical character of
these new social reactions, given that the nature and significance of
their work activities remained largely unchanged:

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

[COVID-19] has unfortunately changed the way we are being perceived. We are considered to be heroes because we save lives . . . but
that’s what we do all year round. (Participant 33, nurse)

Apart from highlighting that they were simply doing their job, a
second explanation for their rejection of hero status seemed to be
related to their resistance to social objectification. They interpreted
the sudden social support of their occupation as opportunistic or
fake. Some participants seemed to feel used, rather than appreciated, thus interpreting their hero status as lacking sincerity and as
an attempt by the public to feel better about themselves, rather than
expressing genuine caring about health care workers:
This whole notion of being a hero, of being oh-so-amazing, is just a
manipulation. It is to make us work without complaining. It’s a trick,
and we all got trapped. (Participant 164, nurse)

A third response consisted of rejecting hero status as a defense
mechanism. They rejected it because they did not see themselves
in the way others saw them. One hospital attendant went so far as
to explain it as a “form of protection” and a way of not letting
themselves get carried away by the praise and recognition:
I think that for me, not seeing myself as a hero is probably a form of
protection, because I think everyone appreciates being recognized and
respected, everyone. But, if you let yourself get absorbed into being this
amazingly valued individual, it probably just hurts too much when at the
end you go back to your place. I think it’s easier to not really believe and
buy into this hero discourse, so that when attention and consideration
fades, you do not feel disappointed. (Participant 162, hospital attendant)

In sum, although some participants embraced their newfound
hero status, most rejected it. Several reasons for the rejection of
their elevated status emerged: the perception that they were simply
doing their work; feeling objectified, used, and manipulated; and
as a defense mechanism out of fear of being hurt, as they did not
believe their elevated status would last.

Discussion
In this article, we respond to recent calls to develop novel approaches to studying invisibility in an effort to “further our understanding of the contours of invisibility in the workplace” (Mahalingam et al., 2019, p. 236). Feeling invisible or undervalued is
important, as the feeling that one’s occupation matters has been
related to greater self-esteem, lower levels of depression and anxiety,
better immune functioning, and more positive affect (Baumeister &
Leary, 1995; Rosenberg & McCullough, 1981). Although existing
research assumes that (in)visibility of work roles is rather stable, we
find that it can change suddenly during crisis periods but may not be
embraced. Thus, our study calls attention to the “stickiness” of invisible work for individuals in organizational settings due to deeply
rooted cultural norms and beliefs about their occupations.
The calls for change through the social valorization of invisible
work in the health care sector have explicitly broken down the
established order of occupational worth by stressing the indispensability and significance of work carried out by all individuals

employed in the health care sector during the COVID-19 pandemic. Although previous research indicates that radical alterations in public discourses and attitudes provoked by catastrophic
events can move invisible workers to a position of hypervisibility
(Mahalingam et al., 2019), we challenge the widely held assumptions that workers indiscriminately embrace seemingly favorable
social valorization or use it to augment their identity and value.
Our findings suggest that despite gaining recognition and visibility
from being perceived as heroes, our participants do not necessarily
relish their newfound elevated status. Interpreting this elevation as
temporary seems to be an important factor in how they respond to
it, leading to its eventual rejection. Therefore, we contend that it is
important to understand the perceptual dynamics of the social
valorization of such work as the pandemic eases.

Theoretical Contributions
We make three important contributions to the existing literature
on invisibility, social marginalization, and dirty work. First, we
build upon prior research that explores the challenges and opportunities presented when workers are navigating invisible and visible identities (e.g., Deery, Kolar, & Walsh, 2019; Smith et al.,
2019) by considering how workers interpret and respond to a
sudden rise in visibility. Thus, we contribute to the existing literature on invisible identities at work by drawing attention to the
inherent paradox in invisibility that stems from established normative regimes of intersubjectivities that govern the dynamic
interplay between work, social interaction, and embodied work
identities (Rabelo & Mahalingam, 2019). Our participants may
have welcomed the sudden appreciation of their work, but they
were skeptical about its lasting effects. Contrary to research that
suggests that feeling valued and appreciated elicits positive emotionality (Simpson, Hughes, Slutskaya, & Balta, 2014; Thiel,
2007), we surmise from our exploratory study that any positive
effects that arise from promotion to heroic status are provisional
and the assumed temporality mitigates any positive impact.
Further, our findings contradict prior literature on provisional
selves that suggests that provisionality prompts individuals to “try on”
different possible selves as a step toward identity adaptation (Ibarra,
1999). Our results suggest that individuals may choose not to participate in temporary identity change, even when that provisional identity casts them in a positive light. Choosing not to engage in identity
experimentation can inhibit their ability to see what is possible for
themselves and their organizational role (Rogiers, De Stobbeleir, &
Viaene, 2020), which can have a long-term negative impact. Those
who embrace hero status, even partially, are more likely to imagine
desired future selves and act upon this (Markus & Nurius, 1986),
leading to positive outcomes in the long term. Given the exploratory
nature of our study, we were unable to quantify the degree to which
some workers experienced each type of invisibility. We suggest that
a ripe area for future research would be to address how different forms
of invisibility may elicit different types of response to distinct forms
of social valorization and in what conditions provisional identities
may be more likely to be embraced or rejected.
Second, our findings demonstrate that hero status seemed for
many of our participants, regardless of the type of invisibility they
experienced in the past, to be too much of a stretch, as many noted
they were simply doing their job and nothing more. Prior research
suggests that workers doing a type of invisible work manage to
surmount the everyday disregard of their work by appropriating
momentary discursive resources of occupational heroism, continually reframing their work in preferred terms (e.g., firefighters;

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SUDDEN HERO STATUS

Tracy & Scott, 2006). However, this research also points out that
workers in other categories (e.g., correctional officers) may struggle or be reluctant to do the same because of unintended or
problematic consequences that such attempts at identity enhancement may provoke (Tracy & Scott, 2006). Our findings extend this
reasoning by revealing several reasons for individuals rejecting
sudden hero status. As we observe, the rejection of hero status can
be driven by workers’ resistance to social objectification because
they perceive it as masking the ongoing marginalization of their
work. As one worker in an Amazon warehouse pointed out during
the pandemic: “They call us ‘essential,’ they call us ‘heroes,’ but
I am just going to say it: ‘we are expendable.’ We did not sign up
to be someone’s hero” (Brown & Flowers, 2020).
We also found that workers rejected hero status because they
interpreted social valorization of their occupation as opportunistic.
Some participants seemed to feel used, rather than appreciated,
thus interpreting their hero status as lacking sincerity and an attempt
by the public to feel better about themselves, rather than expressing
genuine caring about health care workers. Last, some participants
rejected their hero status because they did not see themselves in the
way others viewed them. Thus, an unintended negative consequence
of sudden hero status is potential internal suffering (Higgins, 1989), as
it forms a mismatch in terms of how workers see themselves as
opposed to how others view them. The temporality of this situation
can make self-discrepancies less tenable because celebrated workers
may resist social objectification and believe they are not only being
held to unrealistic expectations, but that these expectations are also
short-lived. Even a short-term mismatch between how individuals
regard themselves compared with how others view them can have
lasting effects on their emotional and psychological well-being, such
as increased anxiety and lowered self-esteem (see Mason et al., 2019
for a recent review of the range of effects of self-discrepancy on
health and well-being).
Third, we synthesize two distinct streams of literature: dirty
work research and social/organizational marginalization literature.
Prior research on dirty work has mainly focused on identity management strategies; that is, what individuals do to feel better about
doing work that others deem “filthy” (physically tainted) or undignified (socially tainted), what normative and discursive resources they have available to do this, and what undermines their
efforts to “untaint” themselves (e.g., Ashforth & Kreiner, 1999;
Ashforth et al., 2007). Social marginalization literature is less
interested in individual responses and more in how the valorization
of work is socially constructed and put into practice through
attribution of usefulness, merit, and recognition (Ashcraft, 2013;
Sennett, 1998). Organizational structures of status incarnate these
tendencies and norms by categorizing work and occupations as
useful or useless, skillful or unskillful, and distributing resources
of recognition and worth accordingly (Anderson, 2019; Sennett,
2006). Thus, social marginalization literature is a useful lens for
explaining where invisibility comes from and dirty work literature
sheds light on agentic responses to invisibility. In bridging these
two literatures, our theorizing suggests that sudden social valorization of certain occupations does not necessarily trigger changes
in self-perception, and that workers have a choice regarding how to
respond to the change in their social image. The response, however, is
not, as some dirty work literature assumes, driven by purely “strategic” motives but involves a more critical reflection of occupational
dignity, professional integrity, and societal hypocrisy. This critical
reflection entails the possibility that workers may hold certain expectations about what genuine recognition of their work should look like

1097

and weigh these expectations against populist forms of social valorization. In this sense, workers do not act as opportunistic agents ready
to seize any chance for status enhancement, but as morally conscious
guardians of their sense of self-worth.

Practical Implications
The practical implications of our study go beyond the current
pandemic. The experience of invisibility has a dual impact on an
individual’s psychological well-being, as it affects two intricately
connected yet distinct aspects of identity—in relation to others and
in relation to oneself. Given the importance of feeling recognized
and included, chronic invisibility may undermine well-being, especially among marginalized workers in stigmatized occupations
(Rabelo & Mahalingam, 2019), and feel like chronic social devaluing (Dutton et al., 2016), leading to apathy and, eventually,
distrust toward others and unwillingness to accept potentially
positive change. The enduring perception of not being seen and
acknowledged by others may ultimately result in social alienation,
self-denigration, and an acute sense of social insignificance (Verhaeghe, 2012). To avert the negative consequences of chronic
invisibility, we recommend that organizations in the public care
sector (and beyond) engage in the design of what we call “invisible
work dignification policies,” with a goal of elevating the social
prestige of low-status and socially denigrated occupational categories inside and outside their professional environments. Such
measures could pave the way for encouraging a collective occupational identity in which individuals can take pride. This would
imply creating conditions that can enable invisible workers to step
out of organizational obscurity, such as by actively acknowledging
their role in the organization, granting them opportunities for
upward mobility, increasing their earning potential, encouraging
employee engagement, and reducing any power distance within
and across organizational roles. For example, ongoing initiatives
could be put in place to establish a level playing field whereby all
employees could share ideas about creating a more egalitarian
working environment, establish forums to get to know one another
and the work they all do, and find opportunities to recognize the
risks and rewards of all the different types of health care work. Put
more succinctly, the dignification of invisible work is not about its
valorization, but the social and organizational willingness to care
genuinely about those who take care of us.

References
Allen, D. (2014). The invisible work of nurses: Hospitals, organisations,
and health care. Abingdon, UK: Routledge. http://dx.doi.org/10.4324/
9781315857794
Allen, T. (2020, July 3). 7 facts on essential workers hazard pay that you
need to know now. Forbes. Retrieved from https://www.forbes.com/
sites/terinaallen/2020/05/20/7-facts-on-essential-workers-hazard-paythat-you-need-to-know-now/#466528541483
Anderson, E. (2019). Private government: How employers rule our lives
(and why we don’t talk about it). Trenton, NJ: Princeton University
Press. Retrieved from https://press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/
9780691176512/private-government
Ariza-Montes, A., Muniz, N. M., Montero-Simó, M. J., & Araque-Padilla,
R. A. (2013). Workplace bullying among health care workers. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 10, 3121–
3139. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijerph10083121
Arnon, Z., Ben-Arye, E., Attias, S., Levy, O., & Schiff, E. (2018). Integrative medicine as a change agent of hospital staff: From hospital

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

1098

HENNEKAM, LADGE, AND SHYMKO

orderlies to partners in health promotion. European Journal of Integrative Medicine, 18, 42– 46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eujim.2018.01.004
Ashcraft, K. L. (2013). The glass slipper: “Incorporating” occupational
identity in management studies. Academy of Management Review, 38,
6 –31. http://dx.doi.org/10.5465/amr.2010.0219
Ashforth, B. E., & Kreiner, G. E. (1999). “How can you do it?” Dirty work
and the challenge of constructing a positive identity. Academy of Management Review, 24, 413– 434. http://dx.doi.org/10.5465/AMR.1999
.2202129
Ashforth, B. E., Kreiner, G. E., Clark, M. A., & Fugate, M. (2007).
Normalizing dirty work: Managerial tactics for countering occupational
taint. Academy of Management Journal, 50, 149 –174. http://dx.doi.org/
10.5465/amj.2007.24162092
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for
interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497–529. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.117
.3.497
Booth, W., Adam, K., & Rolfe, P. (2020, July 5). In fight against coronavirus, the world gives medical heroes a standing ovation. Washington
Post. Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe/
clap-for-carers/2020/03/26/3d05eb9c-6f66-11ea-a156-0048b62cdb51_
story.html
Bouillerce, B., & Stoiber, C. (2018). Stress, émotions, épuisement chez
l’aide-soignant: Pour lutter contre le burn-out. Amsterdam, the Netherlands:
Elsevier Health Sciences. Retrieved from https://books.google.fr/
books?hl⫽fr&lr⫽&id⫽x3VKDwAAQBAJ&oi⫽fnd&pg⫽PP1&dq⫽
Bouillerce,⫹B.,⫹%26⫹Stoiber,⫹C.⫹(2018).⫹Stress,⫹%C3%A9
motions,⫹%C3%A9puisement⫹chez⫹l%E2%80%99aide-soignant:⫹
Pour⫹lutter⫹contre⫹le⫹burn-out.⫹Amsterdam,⫹The⫹Netherlands:⫹
Elsevier⫹Health⫹Sciences&ots⫽Tgfs_zsfC2&sig⫽G3KE5oEqYqsqbt8xihCJwwJrUE&redir_esc⫽y#v⫽onepage&q&f⫽false
Braverman, H. (1974). Labor and monopoly capital. New York, NY:
Monthly Review Press.
Bronson, B. (2015, October 1). Do we value low-skilled work? The New
York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/01/
opinion/do-we-value-low-skilled-work.html
Brown, C., & Flowers, J. (2020, May 29). We work in an Amazon
warehouse. We didn’t sign up to be heroes. The New York Times.
Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/29/opinion/
coronavirus-amazon-hazard-pay.html
Brunetto, Y., Xerri, M., Shriberg, A., Farr-Wharton, R., Shacklock, K.,
Newman, S., & Dienger, J. (2013). The impact of workplace relationships on engagement, well-being, commitment, and turnover for nurses
in Australia and the USA. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 69, 2786 –2799.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jan.12165
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through
qualitative analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. Retrieved from https://
books.google.fr/books?hl⫽fr&lr⫽&id⫽2ThdBAAAQBAJ&oi⫽fnd&
pg⫽PP1&dq⫽Charmaz,⫹K.⫹(2006).⫹Constructing⫹grounded⫹
theory:⫹A⫹practical⫹guide⫹through⫹qualitative⫹analysis.⫹
Thousand⫹Oaks,⫹CA:⫹SAGE&ots⫽fZrYcJlGAY&sig⫽J197RXoOOPYz
Yp51lmC5NuRkCTA&redir_esc⫽y#v⫽onepage&q⫽Charmaz%2C%20K
.%20(2006).%20Constructing%20grounded%20theory%3A%20A%
20practical%20guide%20through%20qualitative%20analysis
.%20Thousand%20Oaks%2C%
Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 20, 37– 46. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1177/001316446002000104
Day-Stirk, F., & Fauveau, V. (2012). The state of the world’s midwifery:
Making the invisible visible. International Journal of Gynaecology and
Obstetrics: The Official Organ of the International Federation of
Gynaecology and Obstetrics, 119(Suppl. 1), S39 –S41. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijgo.2012.04.003

Deery, S., Kolar, D., & Walsh, J. (2019). Can dirty work be satisfying? A
mixed method study of workers doing dirty jobs. Work, Employment and
Society, 33, 631– 647. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0950017018817307
Dill, J. S., Morgan, J. C., & Weiner, B. (2014). Frontline health care
workers and perceived career mobility: Do high-performance work
practices make a difference? Health Care Management Review, 39,
318 –328. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/HMR.0b013e31829fcbfd
Douglas, M. (1966). Purity and danger: An analysis of concepts of pollution and taboo. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Dutton, J. E., Debebe, G., & Wrzesniewski, A. (2016). Being valued and
devalued at work: A social valuing perspective. In B. A. Bechky & K. D.
Elsbach (Eds.), Qualitative organizational research: Best papers from
the Davis Conference on Qualitative Research (Vol. III, pp. 9 –51).
Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing. Retrieved from http://
webuser.bus.umich.edu/janedut/High%20Quality%20Connections/
Being%20valued%20%20final.pdf
France Stratégie. (2015, April 28). Rapport les métiers en 2022 [Report:
Trades in 2020]. Retrieved from https://www.strategie.gouv.fr/publi
cations/metiers-2022-prospective-metiers-qualifications
Gaskell, J. (1987). Gender and skill. In D. W. Livingstone (Ed.), Critical
pedagogy and cultural power (pp. 137–153). London, UK. Palgrave.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-18562-7_8
Gioia, D. A., Corley, K. G., & Hamilton, A. L. (2013). Seeking qualitative
rigor in inductive research: Notes on the Gioia methodology. Organizational Research Methods, 16, 15–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
1094428112452151
Hartz, M. R., & Wright, M. J. (2019). In demand and undervalued—The
plight of American health care workers. American Journal of Public
Health, 109, 209 –210. http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2018.304867
Hewko, S. J., Cooper, S. L., Huynh, H., Spiwek, T. L., Carleton, H. L.,
Reid, S., & Cummings, G. G. (2015). Invisible no more: A scoping
review of the health care aide workforce literature. BMC Nursing, 14,
38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12912-015-0090-x
Higgins, E. T. (1989). Self-discrepancy theory: What patterns of selfbeliefs cause people to suffer? In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology (Vol. 22, pp. 93–136). New York, NY:
Academic Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60306-8
Hughes, E. C. (1958). Men and their work. New York, NY: Free Press.
Retrieved from https://ixtheo.de/Record/1145738400
Ibarra, H. (1999). Provisional selves: Experimenting with image and identity in professional adaptation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44,
764 –791. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2667055
INSEE. (2020, July 25). Economic outlook. July 2020. Retrieved from
https://www.insee.fr/fr/statistiques/4277748?sommaire⫽4318291
Jones, G., Hocine, M., Salomon, J., Dab, W., & Temime, L. (2015).
Demographic and occupational predictors of stress and fatigue in French
intensive-care registered nurses and nurses’ aides: A cross-sectional
study. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 52, 250 –259. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2014.07.015
Kreiner, G. E., Ashforth, B. E., & Sluss, D. M. (2006). Identity dynamics
in occupational dirty work: Integrating social identity and system justification perspectives. Organization Science, 17, 619 – 636. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1287/orsc.1060.0208
Kreiner, G. E., Hollensbe, E. C., & Sheep, M. L. (2009). Balancing borders
and bridges: Negotiating the work– home interface via boundary work
tactics. Academy of Management Journal, 52, 704 –730. http://dx.doi
.org/10.5465/amj.2009.43669916
L’Express. (2020, March 18). Comme leurs voisins, les Français à leur
fenêtre pour applaudir les soignants. Retrieved from https://www
.lexpress.fr/actualite/societe/videos-comme-leurs-voisins-les-francais-aleur-fenetre-pour-applaudir-les-soignants_2121199.html
Macdonald, C. L., & Merrill, D. A. (2002). “It shouldn’t have to be a
trade”: Recognition and redistribution in care work advocacy. Hypatia,
17, 67– 83. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1527-2001.2002.tb00766.x

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SUDDEN HERO STATUS
Mahalingam, R., Jagannathan, S., & Selvaraj, P. (2019). Decasticization,
dignity, and “dirty work” at the intersections of caste, memory, and
disaster. Business Ethics Quarterly, 29, 213–239. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1017/beq.2018.34
Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible selves. American Psychologist,
41, 954 –969. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.41.9.954
Mason, T. B., Smith, K. E., Engwall, A., Lass, A., Mead, M., Sorby, M.,
. . . Wonderlich, S. (2019). Self-discrepancy theory as a transdiagnostic
framework: A meta-analysis of self-discrepancy and psychopathology.
Psychological Bulletin, 145, 372–389. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
bul0000186
McCann, E., Landau, F., & Mahieus, L. (2020, June 3). COVID-19 murals
express hope and help envision urban futures. The Conversation. Retrieved from https://theconversation.com/covid-19-murals-expresshope-and-help-envision-urban-futures-138706
Messing, K. (1998). Hospital trash: Cleaners speak of their role in disease
prevention. Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 12, 168 –187. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1525/maq.1998.12.2.168
Minder, R., & Peltier, E. (2020, March 24). Virus knocks thousands of
health workers out of action in Europe. The New York Times. Retrieved
from https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/24/world/europe/coronaviruseurope-covid-19.html
Nembhard, I. M., & Edmondson, A. C. (2006). Making it safe: The effects
of leader inclusiveness and professional status on psychological safety
and improvement efforts in health care teams. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 27, 941–966. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/job.413
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2017). Women
make up most of the health sector workers but they are underrepresented in high-skilled jobs. Retrieved from https://www.oecd.org/
gender/data/women-make-up-most-of-the-health-sector-workers-butthey-are-under-represented-in-high-skilled-jobs.htm
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2020). Remuneration of health professionals. Retrieved from https://stats.oecd.org/
index.aspx?queryid⫽30025
O’Shea, L. (2019). Future histories: What Ada Lovelace, Tom Paine and
the Paris Commune can teach us about digital technology. London, UK,
Verso.
QSR International. (2020). NVivo Qualitative Data Analysis Software.
Retrieved from https://www.qsrinternational.com/nvivo-qualitativedata-analysis-software/home
Rabelo, V. C., & Mahalingam, R. (2019). “They really don’t want to see
us”: How cleaners experience invisible “dirty” work. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 113, 103–114. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jvb.2018.10
.010
Rogiers, P., De Stobbeleir, K., & Viaene, S. (2020). Stretch yourself:
Benefits and burdens of job crafting that goes beyond the job. Academy
of Management Discoveries. Advance online publication. http://dx.doi
.org/10.5465/amd.2019.0093
Rosenberg, M., & McCullough, B. C. (1981). Mattering: Inferred significance and mental health among adolescents. Research in Community
and Mental Health, 2, 163–182. Retrieved from https://psycnet.apa.org/
record/1983-07744-001
Sennett, R. (1998). The corrosion of character: The personal consequences
of work in the new capitalism. New York, NY: WW Norton. Retrieved
from https://books.google.fr/books?hl⫽fr&lr⫽&id⫽os0U-hxtEfIC&
oi⫽fnd&pg⫽PA15&dq⫽Sennett,⫹R.⫹(1998).⫹The⫹corrosion⫹
of⫹character:⫹The⫹personal⫹consequences⫹of⫹work⫹in⫹the⫹

1099

new⫹capitalism.⫹New⫹York,⫹NY:⫹WW⫹Norton&ots⫽zPiKImGGi5&
sig⫽BtACKHQla1jAhufiv4HlBnbBwCk&redir_esc⫽y#v⫽onepage&q⫽
Sennett%2C%20R.%20(1998).%20The%20corrosion%20of%20character%3
A%20The%20personal%20consequences%20of%20work%20in%20the%
20new%20capitalism.%20New%20York%2C%20NY%3A%20WW%
20Norton&f⫽false
Sennett, R. (2006). The culture of the new capitalism. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press. Retrieved from https://books.google.fr/books?
hl⫽fr&lr⫽&id⫽gCwnUBD4N3AC&oi⫽fnd&pg⫽PP11&dq⫽Sennett,⫹
R.⫹(2006).⫹The⫹culture⫹of⫹the⫹new⫹capitalism.⫹New⫹Haven,⫹CT:
⫹Yale⫹University⫹Press.&ots⫽_ADi3wQJFi&sig⫽PxwiCUVlgsRYX
NGGaEWyhvV_85w&redir_esc⫽y#v⫽onepage&q&f⫽false
Shantz, A., & Booth, J. E. (2014). Service employees and self-verification:
The roles of occupational stigma consciousness and core selfevaluations. Human Relations, 67, 1439 –1465. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1177/0018726713519280
Simpson, R., Hughes, J., Slutskaya, N., & Balta, M. (2014). Sacrifice and
distinction in dirty work: Men’s construction of meaning in the butcher
trade. Work, Employment and Society, 28, 754 –770. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/0950017013510759
Simpson, R., Slutskaya, N., Lewis, P., & Höpful, H. (2012). Introducing
dirty work, concepts and identities. In R. Simpson, N. Slutskaya, P.
Lewis & H. Höpful (Eds.), Dirty work: Concepts and identities (pp.
1–18). London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/
9780230393530_1
Smith, A. N., Watkins, M. B., Ladge, J. J., & Carlton, P. (2019). Making
the invisible visible: Paradoxical effects of intersectional invisibility on
the career experiences of executive Black women. Academy of Management Journal, 62, 1705–1734. http://dx.doi.org/10.5465/amj.2017.1513
Steinberg, R. J. (1990). Social construction of skill: Gender, power, and
comparable worth. Work and Occupations, 17, 449 – 482. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1177/0730888490017004004
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research. Thousand
Oaks, CA: SAGE. http://dx.doi.org/10.5072/genderopen-develop-7
Thiel, D. (2007). Class in construction: London building workers, dirty
work and physical cultures. The British Journal of Sociology, 58, 227–
251. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-4446.2007.00149.x
Tracy, S., & Scott, C. (2006). Sexuality, masculinity and taint management
among firefighters and correctional officers: Getting down and dirty
with “America’s heroes” and the “scum of law enforcement”. Management Communication Quarterly, 20, 6 –38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0893318906287898
van Vuuren, M., Teurlings, J., & Bohlmeijer, E. (2012). Shared fate and
social comparison: Identity work in the context of a stigmatized occupation. Journal of Management & Organization, 18, 263–280. http://dx
.doi.org/10.5172/jmo.2012.18.2.263
Verhaeghe, P. (2012). What about me? The struggle for identity in a
market. London, UK: Scribe Publications. Retrieved from https://
scribepublications.com.au/books-authors/books/what-about-me
Vlasses, F. R. (1997). Too familiar for words: An analysis of “invisible”
nursing work (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Loyola University,
Champaign, IL. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00004650-199707000-00005
Wolfensberger, W., & Thomas, S. (2005). Introductory social role valorization workshop training package. Syracuse, NY: Training Institute
for Human Service Planning, Leadership and Change Agentry, Syracuse
University.

(Appendix follows)

1100

HENNEKAM, LADGE, AND SHYMKO

Appendix
Vignettes of Interviews

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Vignette 1 Hospital Attendant
A 55-year-old hospital attendant in a public hospital reports that
she perceived her work was invisible to others in multiple ways.
She explains that her work is taken for granted by both doctors and
patients, consists of tasks people prefer not to think about, and
mentions that it is seen as simple work that anyone can do. She
also highlights that she feels invisible as a person and stresses the
hierarchy in her hospital and how she often feels inferior compared
with nurses, technicians, and doctors. During the pandemic, she
suddenly felt very visible and explained she was finally recognized
and valued. However, she does not identify as a hero, as she feels
she was just doing her job. She explains that she expects this hero
status to be only temporary, as people had nothing better to do and
she explains she thinks things will go back to how they were
before. This expectation of the brevity of public appreciation
turned out to be accurate in her opinion. She explains that the
government never keeps its promises and that the lack of change
made her feel that the sudden recognition during the pandemic had
been insincere and that she was valued only because people needed
her. Furthermore, she highlights that the sudden hero status and the
subsequent lack of interest in real change made her feel worse—
used and manipulated. Finally, she acknowledges that the most
positive aspect of the pandemic is the cohesion and team spirit at
the hospital. However, she reports that once the COVID had
calmed down, the hierarchy was re-established and that everything
had gone back to normal.

Vignette 2 Technician
A 24-year-old technician in a private hospital explains that her
occupation is not well-known, as it does not directly involve care
work, making it invisible. However, she mentions that the pandemic has made the public aware that non-care work is also
important in providing care for patients. She explains that the
sanitary crisis has led to a strong cohesion with others in the same
vocation and that she enjoys being part of something bigger,

highlighting her sense of belonging to the profession of biomedical
engineer. Moreover, she stresses that the social cohesion at the
hospital was also amplified by the pandemic, as all health care
workers had the same goal. This also broke down hierarchies and
enhanced collaboration. She explains that although she perceives
that some of this cohesion remained after the crisis weakened, the
direction of the hospital still did not recognize nonphysician health
care workers. She perceives that the government and the general
public showed more consideration and respect during the pandemic. Although she hopes this will lead to structural changes in
the way her work and that of her nonphysician colleagues is
treated, she is skeptical about the possibility of enduring change. In
addition, she rejects the imposed hero status, as she feels it was too
much and too demonstrative. She explains that this made her
wonder whether the motives of the public were genuine.

Vignette 3 Nurse
A 44-year-old nurse working in a public hospital explains that
before the pandemic she did not feel valued and that she was seen
as inferior compared with physicians. However, she felt well
regarded by patients. The crisis made her visible and appreciated
but she reports that the sudden recognition during the pandemic
was surreal and felt fake. She goes on to explain that she rejects the
sudden hero status but that she appreciates the fact that her work
was acknowledged. At the end of the confinement, the perception
of being visible vanished and it was a painful experience. This
made her think whether the public praise was genuine or whether
people valued her because they had nothing else to do and because
they needed her during the pandemic. The sudden hero status made
her believe that it would trigger a shift in her social status and,
when this did not occur, she felt manipulated and abused and
engulfed in anger and frustration.
Received June 9, 2020
Revision received August 5, 2020
Accepted August 6, 2020 䡲

