NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL EFFECTS OF SOCIAL DISTANCING IN A PANDEMIC
Maryam Farboodi
Gregor Jarosch
Robert Shimer
Working Paper 27059
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27059

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2020

We thank SafeGraph for making their data freely available to the research community. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Maryam Farboodi has received financial support from MIT for
this research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Maryam Farboodi, Gregor Jarosch, and Robert Shimer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Internal and External Effects of Social Distancing in a Pandemic
Maryam Farboodi, Gregor Jarosch, and Robert Shimer
NBER Working Paper No. 27059
April 2020
JEL No. E1,H0,I1
ABSTRACT
We use a conventional dynamic economic model to integrate individual optimization, equilibrium
interactions, and policy analysis into the canonical epidemiological model. Our tractable
framework allows us to represent both equilibrium and optimal allocations as a set of differential
equations that can jointly be solved with the epidemiological model in a unified fashion.
Quantitatively, the laissez-faire equilibrium accounts for the decline in social activity we measure
in US micro-data from SafeGraph. Relative to that, we highlight three key features of the optimal
policy: it imposes immediate, discontinuous social distancing; it keeps social distancing in place
for a long time or until treatment is found; and it is never extremely restrictive, keeping the
effective reproduction number mildly above the share of the population susceptible to the disease.

Maryam Farboodi
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-627
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
m.farboodi@gmail.com
Gregor Jarosch
Department of Economics
Princeton University
195 Julis Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
gregorjarosch@gmail.com

Robert Shimer
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
shimer@uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

A key parameter in workhorse models of disease transmission is the rate at which sick people
infect susceptible people. A large set of policy measures such as compulsory social distancing
aim at reducing this rate. In this paper, we model the rate of transmission as reflecting the
choice of rational individuals who weigh the cost of getting infected against the benefits
derived from social activity. These benefits capture both social and economic returns from
physical human interaction.
To motivate the exercise, we use micro-data from SafeGraph to show that individuals
across the United States substantially reduced their exposure to others long before state and
local governments imposed the first “shelter-in-place” restrictions in response to the Covid19 pandemic. We then show how to integrate such optimizing behavior into an otherwise
standard epidemiological model. Specifically, we use optimal control theory to derive two
ordinary differential equations (ODEs) which capture individual optimality. Together with
two standard differential equations from epidemiological models, the resulting system of four
differential equations fully summarizes the model and can easily be solved.
The model is consistent with the observation that social activity fell drastically before
there were any legally-mandated restrictions on movement. It is thus a natural laboratory
for evaluating social distancing policies. To do so, we also show how to characterize the
symmetric Pareto optimal allocation. Optimal policy chooses a time path for the amount of
social activity, recognizing the health consequences of a high level of activity. Optimal policy
can likewise be described by the solution to a simple system of four ODEs. Comparison with
the laissez-faire benchmark elucidates the external effects in disease transmission. Moreover,
we show how perfect altruism eliminates the gap between equilibrium and optimum.
The internal benefits of social distancing come from the fact that someone is less likely
to get sick if they engage in more social distancing. This is reflected in individual behavior.
The external benefit comes from the fact that they are less likely to get other people sick,
particularly other strangers. While individuals internalize the cost of social distancing,
optimal policy also recognizes that individuals may ignore the external benefit of reducing the
risk of transmitting illness. Moreover, optimal policy internalizes the effect of an additional
sick person on the quality of health care available to inframarginal individuals.
We then turn quantitative. Since the model is very parsimonious, the calibration targets
various epidemiological findings such as the initial growth rate of the disease, the duration
of infectivity, and the fatality rate.
Our most important findings are the following: First, the laissez-faire equilibrium reduction in social activity due to the internalized cost of infection is strong. It delays the peak

1

outbreak and leads to a substantial reduction in the number of expected fatalities, relative
to a no-response benchmark. However, individuals only reduce activity once the risk of
infection becomes non-negligible.
Second, and in contrast, social distancing optimally starts as soon as the disease emerges,
discontinuously suppressing social activity. This discrete drop in activity delays the pandemic
and hence buys time. Because of the hope for a cure, this strictly reduces the expected
number of deaths and yields a welfare gain.
Third, optimal social distancing is persistent. Absent a cure, social activity remains
depressed for years. This is the flip side of delay. Because the pool of susceptible individuals
drains only slowly, activity needs to remain suppressed for a long time unless a cure is found.
Nevertheless, asymptotically social activity returns to normal, with infections stopping only
because of herd immunity as the product of the disease’s basic reproduction number R0 and
the share of people who are susceptible falls below one.
Fourth, social distancing is never too restrictive. At any point in time, the effective
reproduction number for a disease is the expected number of people that an infected person
infects. In contrast to the basic reproduction number, it accounts for the current level of
social activity and the fraction of people who are susceptible. Importantly, optimal policy
keeps the effective reproduction number above the fraction of people who are susceptible,
although for a long time only mildly so. That is, social activity is such that, if almost everyone
were susceptible to the disease, the disease would grow over time. That means that optimal
social activity lets infections grow until the susceptible population is sufficiently small that
the number of infected people starts to shrink. As the stock of infected individuals falls,
the optimal ratio of the effective reproduction number to the fraction of susceptible people
grows until it eventually converges to the basic reproduction number.
To understand why social distancing is never too restrictive, first observe that social
activity optimally returns to its pre-pandemic level in the long run, even if a cure is never
found. To understand why, suppose to the contrary that social distancing is permanently
imposed, suppressing social activity below the first-best (disease-free world) level. That
means that a small increase in social activity has a first-order impact on welfare. Of course,
there is a cost to increasing social activity: it will lead to an increase in infections. However,
since the number of infected people must converge to zero in the long run, by waiting long
enough to increase social activity, the number of additional infections can be made arbitrarily
small while the benefit from a marginal increase in social activity remains positive.
Now consider the role of social distancing in the short run. With a low initial infection
rate, pushing the effective reproduction number below the share of susceptible people implies
that the total number of individuals who get infected over any time interval will be small.
2

That means that the health status of the population—the share of susceptible and infected
people—will barely change. It follows that if it is optimal to keep the effective reproduction
number below the share of susceptible people initially, it will be optimal to do so at any later
date. But we have just argued that this cannot be the case. Thus the effective reproduction
number must always be bigger than the share of susceptible people. In our calibrated model,
it is mildly so for a sustained period. We note that this argument is predicated on the
assumption that the initial infection rate is small, since otherwise a period of strong social
distancing may have a big effect on the health status of the population. Indeed, we verify
that if the initial infection rate is large enough, an optimal policy may temporarily push the
effective reproduction number below the share of susceptible people.
We then revisit our micro-data and contrast it quantitatively with the model under
our baseline calibration. The model captures both the drop in social activity prior to any
government intervention and the pace of the contraction surprisingly well. We corroborate
this with additional aggregated data from Sweden that display similar patterns.
We then consider several robustness exercises with respect to our calibration. An important takeaway is that even large parameter changes matter little for the shape of equilibrium
or optimal social activity. Optimal policy is fairly insensitive even to large parameter changes
and is well summarized by the points discussed above: Immediate social distancing that ends
only slowly but is not overly restrictive. This is reassuring given the large current amount of
parameter uncertainty. These robustness exercises also document that our basic framework
naturally accommodates a rich set of extensions. We therefore conclude with an additional
set of proposed extension that we believe are of first order.

2

Related Work

Our basic approach builds on the susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) model (Kermack and
McKendrick, 1927). There is a rapidly growing body of work that uses this epidemiological
model, together with standard economic models, to understand the interplay between disease
transmission and economic activity.
The basic epidemiology model is reviewed in Atkeson (2020), who analyzes the optimal
lock down policy in an economic environment. Following a similar approach, Eichenbaum,
Rebelo and Trabandt (2020) study the two-way interaction of disease dynamics and economic
activity in a macroeconomic SIR model. While theirs is a substantially richer environment,
we obtain a larger degree of analytical tractability and treat equilibrium and optimum in a
unified fashion that simply adds two ODEs to the SIR model. A further key difference is
that, in their model, disease transmission and its externalities happens through consumption
3

and the government acts through a tax on consumption. In our setup, disease transmission
happens through general activity, both economic and social and the government acts through
restricting social activity. This allows us to directly map to newly available data on social
activity, for example the SafeGraph data on foot traffic we discuss below.
Other papers that focus on the individual response to a pandemic include Garibaldi,
Moen and Pissarides (2020), who use tools from search and matching and Krueger, Uhlig
and Xie (2020), who focus on the shift in the sectoral composition of consumption as a force
that mitigates the economic fallout of the pandemic.
Alvarez, Argente and Lippi (2020) study a planning problem similar to ours where the
planner directly controls the amount of activity and trades of the losses from restrictions
against the health benefits. However, they exogenously fix the amount of activity absent
policy intervention, while we explicitly model the choice of social activity by individuals.
This allows us to contrast the optimal amount of social contacts with the laissez-faire one,
taking seriously that even absent mobility restrictions the negative effects of the epidemic
are partially internalized.
Some other recent papers focusing on equilibrium and optimal policy include Jones,
Philippon and Venkateswaran (2020), Hall, Jones and Klenow (2020), Dewatripont, Goldman, Muraille and Platteau (2020), Piguillem and Shi (2020), Barro, Ursua and Weng (2020),
Glover, Heathcote, Krueger and Rios-Rull (2020), Keppo, Kudlyak, Quercioli, Smith and
Wilson (2020), and Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2020).
The paper is also related to an older literature on social externalities, including Diamond
and Maskin (1979) and Kremer and Morcom (1998). In particular, Diamond and Maskin
(1979) introduce the distinction between a quadratic and a linear matching technology. With
quadratic matching additional social activity by others raises the likelihood of social contact
and thus disease transmission for all individuals. E.g., with more individuals in parks,
restaurants and public transit any given trip to a park/restaurant/subway visit is more
likely to lead to disease. Such a quadratic matching function has a search externality that,
traditionally, is viewed as positive (Diamond, 1982), but that turns negative in an age of
disease. It stands in contrast to a linear search technology where an individual’s social
contacts merely depend on her own social activity and not on those of others. We believe
that such a technology applies to cases where social activity and the associated risk of disease
transmission is explicitly sought out. We therefore argue that the quadratic technology is
appropriate to model the dynamics of Covid-19, while a linear technology might be the right
tool to model an epidemic like HIV.
Greenwood, Kircher, Santos and Tertilt (2019) study the HIV epidemic in Malawi using
a computational choice-theoretic equilibrium model of sexual behavior. They model the
4

individual effort to find a partner in different markets, which are associated with different
degrees of risk. And indeed, the risk of infection at any given market depends on the entire
distribution of health types visiting the market in line with the arguments just made.
Budish (2020) treats disease containment as an economic constraint and discusses policies
that maximize welfare subject to the containment constraint. In turn, our framework treats
the system of differential equations governing the evolution of the sickness as the relevant
constraint. A policy-maker maximizes welfare subject to that constraint fully taking into
account the damage caused by the disease. As a consequence, the policy-maker may well
choose policies that let the epidemic spread if the cost of containment are too high. Indeed,
we find that this is always optimal, albeit at a slow pace.

3

Declining Social Activity, Early and Everywhere

In this section, we use newly available micro-data that document substantial behavioral
changes across the United States even before any policy measures were taken.
We work with micro-data data from SafeGraph.1 Among other things, SafeGraph provides highly disaggregated and detailed high-frequency information on individual travel in
the United States. The population sample is a panel of opt-in, anonymized smartphone
devices, and is well balanced across US demographics and space.
In early April 2020, SafeGraph made two datasets freely available to researchers.2 Their
first “Covid-19 Response Dataset,” named “Weekly Patterns,” registers GPS-identified visits
to Points of Interest (POI) (primarily businesses) with exact known location in the United
States at hourly frequency in a balanced panel. The data is currently available covering the
period March 1 to April 11, 2020. The dataset is large. On March 1, the dataset recorded
approximately 32.1 million individual visits to approximately 3.9 million POI.
The second dataset, named “Social Distancing Metrics,” uses information from individual
cell devices that can be assigned to a home address (using their night-time location) to
measure individual foot traffic and its response to the outbreak. The dataset goes back
to January 1, 2020 and currently, runs until April 9 and is likewise large. On March 1,
the dataset contains information from over 20 million devices across 220,000 census block
groups with at least 5 devices. Among other things, the data measures for each census
1

Attribution: SafeGraph, a data company that aggregates anonymized location data from numerous
applications in order to provide insights about physical places. To enhance privacy, SafeGraph excludes
census block group information if fewer than five devices visited an establishment in a month from a given
census block group.
2
For
detailed
information,
see
https://docs.safegraph.com/docs/weekly-patterns
and
https://docs.safegraph.com/docs/social-distancing-metrics.

5

block group the median number of minutes a device dwells at its home location (variable
median home dwell time). In addition, it also measures the number of devices that spend
the entire day-of-week at the home location (variable completely home device count).
We construct our measures at the state level. We use the first dataset to count the total
daily number of visits, for each state, to POIs. We proceed identically for our other two
measures. We subtract the median minutes spent at home from 24 × 60 = 1440 and take a
daily state-wide average. We similarly construct the state-wide fraction of all devices that
leave the house at least once during any day. We express all three variables relative to a
baseline week (dividing by the corresponding day during the first week of March).
This gives us, for each state, three different measures of the decline of social activity
that naturally map to the model. Figure 1 reports our result for the first variable, visits to
POI. We plot, at any given date, the median value (across states) of the decline relative to
baseline, along with the max and min and 10th and 90th percentile.
The figure shows a remarkably uniform contraction of social activity across US states
beginning in the second week of March, leveling off at some 50 percent relative to baseline
towards the end of the month.
The figure also depicts the fraction of the US population subject to official stay-at-home
or shelter-in-place orders. The figure shows that social activity began contracting 10 days
before the first significant orders were put into place around March 20.
We complement this with the other two social distancing metrics we have available, days
spent entirely at home and daily dwell time at home. Their decline is depicted in Figure 2.
These two variables display a somewhat smaller decline of 20-30% relative to baseline. The
basic pattern remains the same: Social activity starting contracting substantially, rapidly,
and long before the first lockdown measures. This also happened across the board in the
United States.
This offers a direct and readily available measure of the extent of individual social activity
which is both the key endogenous variable in our model, as well as the key driver of the
pandemic. Since we model social activity rather than, say, consumption, our model can
directly connect with this high-frequency data. We will later confront the quantitative
properties of our model with this evidence and argue that it offers a close account of the
decline in social activity in the US in March 2020.

4

Model

The basic epidemiological framework is a continuous time SIR model with a possibility
of death, i.e. a SIRD model. Individuals susceptible to the disease may become infected
6

1.2

POI Visits

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Mar 8 Mar 15 Mar 22 Mar 29 Apr 5 Apr 12

date
Notes: Visits to Points of Interest in SafeGraph’s “Weekly Patterns” Covid-19 Response Dataset. We
sum daily visits within each state and express them relative to the same day during baseline week (first
week of March 2020). We plot the median (min, max, .. across states) decline relative to baseline at
any given day. The solid blue line is the median. The dark share is 10% − 90% interval, and the light
shade is min-max interval. The solid red line is the percent of the population subject to stay-at-home
or shelter-in-place orders. The population subject to these orders is based on authors’ own calculations
using https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-stay-at-home-order.html.

Figure 1: Declining Activity, Early and Everywhere

7

1.2
Time Spent out of House

1.2

Leave House

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Mar 8 Mar 15 Mar 22 Mar 29 Apr 5 Apr 12

Mar 8 Mar 15 Mar 22 Mar 29 Apr 5 Apr 12

date

date

Notes: Social activity based on SafeGraph’s “Social Distancing Metrics” Covid-19 Response Dataset.
Left Panel: Fraction of devices that leave assigned “home” at least once during any day. Right Panel:
Dwell time at home, median device. Measures at the census block group, we take state-wide weighted
averages and express them relative to the same day during baseline week (first week of March 2020). We
plot the median (min, max, .. across states) decline relative to baseline at any given day. The solid blue
line is the median. The dark share is 10% − 90% interval, and the light shade is min-max interval. The
solid red line is the population under lockdown. Population under lockdown is based on authors’ own
calculations using https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-stay-at-home-order.html.

Figure 2: Declining Activity, Early and Everywhere II

8

through contact with other infected individuals. The infected stochastically recover or die.
Individuals do not know if they are susceptible or infected, but in our baseline model, they
can tell when they have recovered from the disease. In our baseline model, individuals are
otherwise homogeneous.
At each time t ≥ 0, a measure 1 of individuals are in one of the four states, susceptible
(s), infected (i), recovered (r), or deceased (d). Let Nj (t), j ∈ {s, i, r, d}, denote the measure
of individuals in each state. Thus Ns (t) also gives the fraction of the population that has
not gotten infected. Assume that Ni (0) > 0, so there is a seed of infection.
A susceptible individual can get infected by meeting an infected individual. However, individuals are unaware if they are infected. Infected individuals recover at rate (1−π(Ni (t)))γ
and die at rate π(Ni (t))γ, where π(Ni (t)) ∈ [0, 1] is the infected fatality rate, the fraction
of infected individuals who eventually die from the disease. We allow this to depend on the
number of infected people, reflecting the possibility that the disease overwhelms the hospital
system. A recovered individual knows that he is recovered. We assume that recovering from
the disease confers lifetime immunity, so a recovered individual no longer transmits the disease and can no longer become sick. We lump the risk and cost of death (i.e. the lost value
of life) and the cost of disease together in a single function κ(Ni (t)), the expected cost that
an infected individual pays when he exits the infected state. Again, we allow for this cost to
depend on Ni to capture that treatment quality (and hence π) might deteriorate when the
health care system becomes overrun.
Individuals discount the future at rate ρ, and a cure for the disease is found at rate δ.
For simplicity we assume that a cure, once found, is perfect and immediately wipes out the
disease.
We assume that all living individuals choose their level of social activity a, and get utility
u(a) from social activity a. Assume u is single-peaked and its maximum is attained at a
finite value a∗ > 0. Without loss of generality, normalize a∗ = 1 and u(a∗ ) = 0. The
first normalization keeps the notation the same as the basic SIR model in the absence of a
behavioral response to the outbreak. The latter allows us to use u as a measure of the utility
loss from social distancing.
Disease transmission depends on the rate at which individuals have social interactions.
Let Aj (t) denote the aggregate amount of social activity by all individuals of type j ∈ {s, i, r}.
We assume throughout that all individuals of a given type choose the same level of social
activity, although when we study equilibrium, we consider the deviation of a single individual
to a different level of activity. The rate that an individual of type j has social interaction
with an individual of type j 0 is Aj (t)Nj (t)Aj 0 (t)Nj 0 (t), the product of the level of social
activity of the two types. In particular, the rate that susceptible individuals get sick is
9

βAs (t)Ns (t)Ai (t)Ni (t), where β > 0 captures the ease of transmitting the disease. Formally,
this is a quadratic matching technology with random search.3
Together the assumptions that preferences u depend on social activity while disease
transmission depends on social interactions, is central to our view of social distancing. It
captures the idea that individuals value social activity (going to a restaurant, going for a
walk, going to the office) and, absent health issues, are indifferent about whether other
people are also engaging in social activity.4 On the other hand, if an individual goes for a
walk and doesn’t encounter anybody, they cannot get sick. Thus interactions are critical for
disease transmission.
The disease transmission function captures the idea that if a particular group chooses
little social activity Aj (t), one is unlikely to make social contact with them. It also captures
the idea that the amount of social interactions depends not only on a particular group’s
choice, but also on everyone else choices. This captures, for instance, that even an individual
frequently going to a restaurant or to the office has few social interactions if nobody else
is there. As a consequence, disease transmission displays a negative externality: increasing
social activity increases other people’s social interactions, putting them at a higher risk of
infection.
Under our modeling assumptions, the laws of motion describing the aggregate state are
given by
Ns0 (t) = −βAs (t)Ns (t)Ai (t)Ni (t)

(1)

Ni0 (t) = βAs (t)Ns (t)Ai (t)Ni (t) − γNi (t)

(2)

Nr0 (t) = (1 − π(Ni (t)))γNi (t)

(3)

Nd0 (t) = π(Ni (t))γNi (t)

(4)

with each of the Nj (0) given. If Aj (t) = 1 for j ∈ {s, i} and π(·) = 0, this is the standard
SIR model (Kermack and McKendrick, 1927). Allowing π 6= 0 gives us the SIRD model. We
stress that there are not only social interactions between the susceptible and the infected,
An alternative would be a linear technology, in which case type j individuals interact with type j 0
Aj (t)Nj (t)A0j (t)Nj0 (t)
individuals at rate P 00 A00 (t)N
. This formulation makes sense if type j individuals desire to interact
00 (t)
3

j

j

j

with somebody at rate Aj (t). With a linear technology, changing social activity by other people changes the
distribution of social interactions without changing the level. Such an alternative might be the appropriate
modeling choice for other epidemics such as HIV (Kremer and Morcom, 1998). However, for Covid-19 it
seems unlikely that additional social activity by non-infected individuals would reduce the infection risk of
the susceptible, all else equal. We highlight, however, that this assumption is crucial for certain outcomes, for
instance the optimal social activity of the recovered, which one would want to boost with a linear matching
technology.
4
For an environment where interactions are critical, see Diamond (1982). One can imagine reasons why
the marginal utility of social activity is increasing or decreasing in the social activity of others.

10

but also between all other groups. For instance, the recovered can optimally choose Ar (t)
without fear of infection; and susceptible individuals meet one another without consequences.
Our social matching function allows these interactions to happen, but they do not affect the
number of interactions where the disease gets transmitted.
Note that only As (t) and Ai (t) affect disease transmission. Also note our assumption
that individuals do not know whether they are susceptible or infected. We thus impose
the measurability restriction that As (t) = Ai (t) and use A(t) to denote this common level
of social activity. The expected number of others in contact with an infected individual
during the time she is infected is βA(t)2 /γ. In a population in which individuals do not
change their behavior in response to the disease A(t) = a∗ = 1, e.g. when the disease first
emerged. Therefore the basic reproduction number R0 , defined as the expected number
of others infected by an infected individual in a population where everyone is susceptible,
is R0 = β/γ. We also define the effective reproduction number, the expected number of
others infected by an infected individual, given the current level of social activity A(t) and
the current fraction of susceptible people Ns (t). This number is Re (t) = βA(t)2 Ns (t)/γ.
Reductions in social activity drive the ratio of the effective reproduction number to the
fraction of susceptible people, Re (t)/Ns (t) below the basic reproduction number R0 , which
is a primitive of the environment.

5

Laissez-faire Equilibrium

In this section, we consider the problem of an individual who is either susceptible or infected
choosing his own rate of social activity, taking the number and social activity of other infected
people as given. We then impose the equilibrium restriction that individual outcomes must
coincide with the aggregate.
An individual has rational beliefs about his own probabilities of being susceptible, infected, and recovered, which we denote by ns (t), ni (t), and nr (t), respectively. The individual knows when he is recovered but cannot distinguish between the susceptible and infected
states. He thus chooses two time paths for social activity, a(t) when he is susceptible or
infected and ar (t) when he is recovered. Finally, the individual discounts future utility at
rate ρ and recognizes that the problem ends at rate δ when a cure is found. Putting this
together, the individual solves
Z
max

{a(t),ar (t)}

∞


e−(ρ+δ)t (ns (t) + ni (t))u(a(t)) + nr (t)u(ar (t)) − γni (t)κ(Ni (t)) dt

0

11

(5)

subject to
n0s (t) = −βa(t)ns (t)A(t)Ni (t)
n0i (t) = βa(t)ns (t)A(t)Ni (t) − γni (t)
n0r (t) = (1 − π(Ni (t)))γni (t)
with ns (0) = Ns (0), ni (0) = Ni (0), and nr (0) = Nr (0) given. The laws of motions reflect
that the individual takes the time path of everyone else’s choice A(t) and the associated
aggregate infection rate Ni (t) as given. However, the individual’s past choices of a(t) affects
his probability of being in each of the states.
To solve the individual’s problem, first note that ar (t) affects the objective but none of
the constraints. It is thus optimal to set ar (t) = a∗ = 1 and then u(ar (t)) = 0 for all t.
Dropping this control variable and the unnecessary third constraint, write the current value
Hamiltonian as
H(ns (t), ni (t), a(t), λs (t), λi (t)) = (ns (t) + ni (t))u(a(t)) − γni (t)κ(Ni (t))

− λs (t)βa(t)ns (t)A(t)Ni (t) + λi (t) βa(t)ns (t)A(t)Ni (t) − γni (t) ,
where λs (t) and λi (t) are the co-state variables associated with the two remaining constraints.
There are three necessary first order conditions for optimal control. First, the derivative
of the Hamiltonian with respect to the control variable a(t) is zero:
(ns (t) + ni (t))u0 (a(t)) = (λs (t) − λi (t))βns (t)A(t)Ni (t).

(6)

This static first order condition balances the returns from social activity and the risk of getting infected. Second and third, the derivatives with respect to the state variables ns (t) and
ni (t) are equal to minus the time derivative of the costate, with a correction for discounting:
(ρ + δ)λs (t) − λ0s (t) = u(a(t)) + (λi (t) − λs (t))βa(t)A(t)Ni (t),

(ρ + δ)λi (t) − λ0i (t) = u(a(t)) − γ κ(Ni (t)) + λi (t) .

(7)
(8)

There are two more necessary conditions for optimality, the transversality conditions
lim e−(ρ+δ)t λs (t)ns (t) = lim e−(ρ+δ)t λi (t)ni (t) = 0.

t→∞

t→∞

(9)

Equilibrium requires that individual and aggregate behaviors are consistent at every
point in time, ns (t) = Ns (t), ni (t) = Ni (t), and a(t) = A(t) for all t > 0. Imposing those
12

restrictions gives us a system of four differential equations and one static equation. Together
with initial conditions for Ns (0) and Ni (0) and the transversality conditions (9), these fully
summarize the model:
Ns0 (t) = −βA(t)2 Ns (t)Ni (t)
Ni0 (t) = βA(t)2 Ns (t)Ni (t) − γNi (t)
(ρ + δ)λs (t) − λ0s (t) = u(A(t)) + (λi (t) − λs (t))βA(t)2 Ni (t),

(ρ + δ)λi (t) − λ0i (t) = u(A(t)) − γ κ(Ni (t)) + λi (t) ,
(Ns (t) + Ni (t))u0 (A(t)) = (λs (t) − λi (t))βA(t)Ns (t)Ni (t).
The first two differential equations impose As (t) = Ai (t) = A(t) on the aggregate relationships (1) and (2). The last three equations correspond to equations (7), (8), and (6) with
a(t) = A(t), ni (t) = Ni (t), and ns (t) = Ns (t).
We solve this model through a backward shooting algorithm. Fix λs (T ) and λi (T ) at
their asymptotic values at some faraway date T , but make Ni (T ) slightly positive. Then
search for the value of Ns (T ) that achieves a desired initial condition for Ns and Ni at a
much earlier date. In practice, we can find the equilibrium in a few seconds.

6

Social Optimum

We now solve the problem faced by a benevolent social planner who dictates the time path of
social activity A(t) and Ar (t). The planner, like the individual, recognizes that a reduction
in contacts lowers utility directly, but she also recognizes the externalities associated with
illness. We show that this gives rise to a system of four ODEs which very closely resemble
the ODEs shaping equilibrium we just discussed.

6.1

Planner’s Problem

The planner solves
Z
max

{A(t),Ar (t)}

∞


e−(ρ+δ)t (Ns (t) + Ni (t))u(A(t)) + Nr (t)u(Ar (t)) − γNi (t)κ(Ni (t)) dt

(10)

0

subject to equations (1)–(3). As in equilibrium, it is optimal to set Ar (t) = a∗ = 1 and so
u(Ar (t)) = 0 for all t, since this does not affect the evolution of the state variables. Then

13

the Hamiltonian is
H(Ns (t), Ni (t), A(t), As (t), Ai (t)) = (Ns (t) + Ni (t))u(A(t)) − γNi (t)κ(Ni (t))

− µs (t)βA(t)2 Ns (t)Ni (t) + µi (t) βA(t)2 Ns (t)Ni (t) − γNi (t) .
The necessary first order condition with respect to the control A is
(Ns (t) + Ni (t))u0 (A(t)) = 2(µs (t) − µi (t))βA(t)Ni (t)Ns (t),

(11)

while the necessary costate equations are
(ρ + δ)µs (t) − µ0s (t) = u(A(t)) + (µi (t) − µs (t))βA(t)2 Ni (t),
(ρ + δ)µi (t) − µ0i (t) = u(A(t)) − γ κ(Ni (t)) + Ni (t)κ0 (Ni (t)) + µi (t)
+ (µi (t) − µs (t))βA(t)2 Ns (t).

(12)

(13)

Finally, the planner also has necessary tranversality conditions
lim e−(ρ+δ)t µs (t)Ns (t) = lim e−(ρ+δ)t µi (t)Ni (t) = 0.

t→∞

t→∞

(14)

There are a few key differences between the first order conditions in the equilibrium and
optimum problem. First, the planner recognizes that raising A(t) increases meetings at rate
proportional to 2A(t), while in equilibrium raising a(t) increases meetings at rate proportional to A(t). This creates an extra factor of 2 in equation (11) compared to equation (6).
Second, the planner recognizes the health care externality, that the cost of being sick may
depend on how many people are sick Ni (t). This is the additional term involving the derivative of the cost function κ in equation (13) compared to equation (8). Third, the planner
recognizes that sick people get other people sick, while in equilibrium individuals do not care
about this outcome. This shows up as the last term in equation (13).
As usual, the aggregate state still satisfies
Ns0 (t) = −βA(t)2 Ns (t)Ni (t)
Ni0 (t) = βA(t)2 Ns (t)Ni (t) − γNi (t)
Thus we again have a system of four differential equations and one static equation. We again
solve it using a backward shooting algorithm, searching for the terminal value of Ns (T ) for
given Ni (T ).
Before we put numbers into the model, we briefly discuss how a model with altruism can
14

encompass both laissez-faire and optimum.

6.2

Perfect and Imperfect Altruism

In the laissez-faire equilibrium, people only care about their own health. In reality, diseases
are often transmitted to family and friends, and so it seems plausible that many people
would like to reduce the risk of transmitting the disease, not just the chance of getting it.
We capture this through a model of imperfect altruism, indexed by an altruism parameter
α ∈ [0, 1]. At one extreme, α = 0, individuals would not socially distance if they knew they
were sick. This is the laissez-faire equilibrium. At the other extreme, α = 1, individuals fully
internalize the cost of making others sick, except for any possible congestion in the health
care system. We show that this is the social optimum when κ is constant.
To illustrate this, we modify the individual objective function to assume individual are
concerned about making others sick:
Z
max

{a(t),ar (t)}

∞

e−(ρ+δ)t (ns (t) + ni (t))u(a(t)) + nr (t)u(ar (t))

0


− γni (t)κ(Ni (t)) + αβa(t)ni (t)A(t)Ns (t)(λi (t) − λs (t)) dt.
The new piece is the last term. When an individual infects a susceptible person, at rate
βa(t)ni (t)A(t)Ns (t), she suffers a utility loss equal to a fraction α of the difference λi (t) −
λs (t), where again λj (t) is the costate variable on nj (t), j ∈ {s, i}. In words, this difference
represents the private cost of getting sick.
With this modification to the objective function, we can again write down the Hamiltonian and find the optimality and costate equations:



ns (t) + ni (t) u0 (a(t)) = βA(t) λs (t) − λi (t) ns (t)Ni (t) + αni (t)Ns (t)

(ρ + δ)λs (t) − λ0s (t) = u(a(t)) + βa(t)A(t)Ni (t) λi (t) − λs (t)


(ρ + δ)λi (t) − λ0i (t) = u(a(t)) − γ κ(Ni (t)) + λi (t) + αβa(t)A(t)Ns (t) λi (t) − λs (t) .
As usual for equilibrium, we then impose the conditions a(t) = A(t), ns (t) = Ns (t), and
ni (t) = Ni (t). If α = 0, this returns the equilibrium equations. If α = 1 and κ is constant,
this returns the equations describing the dynamics of the planner’s solution. Intermediate
values of α capture a degree of imperfect altruism.
In this formulation, we note one natural limit of altruism: We think it is unlikely that
individuals view their own behavior as having an impact on the total number of infected
people Ni (t) and hence on the risk of death captured by κ. This is really an aggregate
15

outcome, in contrast to the possibility that one person’s social activity makes someone else
sick, which an individual is more likely to believe that she can control.

7

Quantitative Exercises

7.1

Calibration

We calibrate the model at a daily frequency to US data on the 2020 Covid-19 outbreak.
We offer some robustness with regard to the most important choices made in this section in
Section 8.
To begin with, we set ρ = 0.05/365 to capture a 5% annual discount rate. In addition, we
set δ = 0.67/365, which implies an expected duration at which a cure is found of 1.5 years.
We highlight that this jointly implies a model of heavy discounting relative to a standard
economic model.
Next, we set γ = 1/7 such that the expected length of sickness lasts 1 week. We recognize
that the average disease lasts longer, but it appears that few people are infectious and
asymptomatic for longer than a week. Lauer et al. (2020) report a median incubation period
for COVID-19 of five days and that 98% of people who develop symptoms after an exposure
do so within 11.5 days. Below, we offer some robustness with regard to this choice.
We calibrate β for the model to capture data on the doubling time at the onset of the
Covid-19 outbreak. Specifically, we target an initial daily growth rate of the stock of infected
equal to 30%, consistent with a doubling time of approximately 3 days.5 From (2), we have
N 0 (0)
that Nii (0) = β − γ, giving β = 0.3 + γ = 0.443. This implies a basic reproduction number
of R0 = βγ = 3.1. Since there appears to be considerable uncertainty and disagreement
about the value of R0 we note that this strategy of backing out its value only relies on the
expected duration of infectivity and aggregate data on doubling time in the early stages,
two numbers that appear to be relatively well understood. However, some recent estimates
suggest a higher value for R0 and several authors work with a lower γ. We therefore offer
a robustness exercise below where we use a higher value of R0 and a correspondingly lower
value of γ, while still hitting the initial 30% daily growth rate.
We work with the following period utility function,
u(a) = log a − a + 1.

(15)

We think of the first part as the gross returns from social activity, in particular consumption,
5

JHU’s Center for Systems Science and Engineering reports a doubling time of 2–5 days in the US in the
very early stages of the epidemic (Dong, Du and Gardner, 2020).

16

and of the second part as the cost associated with it. This gives an interior solution at a∗ = 1
in a disease-free environment, with u(1) = 0.
We now turn to the cost of disease. We assume that the infection mortality rate for
the disease is π = 0.002, independent of Ni (t). This is lower than many estimates of the
case mortality rate, but this smaller number is consistent with evidence that there are many
undetected cases in real-world populations. Importantly, a constant death rate shuts down
the health care externality which arises as health care deteriorates when many people are
infected. As we show below, we still find that it is optimal to delay infections and typically
optimal to avoid a high peak infection rate.
We think of the cost κ as equal to πv, where v is the value of a statistical life (VSL). We
follow Greenstone and Nigam (2020) in assuming that v =$10 Million for the US.6 Roughly
speaking, this number is based on evidence that a typical individual would pay $10,000 to
avoid a 0.1% probability of death. With a discount rate of ρ, this is equivalent to paying
a constant stream of ρ × $10, 000 to avoid this death risk, or equivalently $1.37 per day.
Compare this to US consumption per capita of approximately $45,000 per year or $123 per
day, and we reach the conclusion that people would permanently give up over 1.1 percent of
their consumption to avoid a 0.1 percent death risk.
To see how to map this into our model, ask someone with preferences (15) what fraction
x of her consumption she would be willing to give up to avoid a 0.1 percent probability of
death. If the answer is x = 0.011, then v solves
log(1 − 0.011)
log(1)
− 0.001v =
ρ
ρ
0.989
This implies v = −1000 log
≈ 80, 000 in our model units. Multiplying these together gives
ρ
κ = πv = 160.
We note that this value is in the same ballpark as the one chosen in several other recent
paper on the outbreak. For instance, Alvarez, Argente and Lippi (2020) choose a five times
higher fatality rate π but a far lower VSL of $1.3 million. Similarly, Hall, Jones and Klenow
(2020) work with a VSL 50% higher than Alvarez, Argente and Lippi (2020) (and so still
far below our value) but a four-fold higher death rate which implies a very similar value of
κ. Finally, Eichenbaum et al. (2020) pick a VSL of $9.3 million and a fatality rate of 0.5
percent, which implies a two fold higher κ. We offer a robustness exercise below where we
consider doubling κ to reflect a higher infected fatality rate or a higher VSL.
Finally, we assume that initially Ni (0) = 10−6 . Prior to date 0, we assume A(t) = a∗ = 1,
6

See Greenstone and Nigam (2020) for a useful discussion of this value and the use of VSL in calculations
such as ours.

17

so the disease grew without any response in social activity. From a very low initial prevalence,
this implies that approximately Ni (0)/(R0 − 1) individuals have recovered or died by date
0, leaving the remaining 0.9999985 individuals susceptible.
We summarize our calibration strategy in Table 1.
Parameters
Parameter Description
Conditional transmission prob.
Rate at which illness ends
Cost of infection
Arrival rate of cure
Discounting
Fraction initially affected

Parameter

Value

Target

β
γ
κ
δ
ρ
Ni (0)

0.3 + γ
1/7
160
0.67/365
0.05/365
10−6

Initial doubling time
Duration until symptomatic
Death rate and VSL
Exp. time until vaccine/cure
Annual discount rate

R0
Ns (0)

3.1
0.9999985

Implied by γ and β
no social distancing before t = 0

Other
Basic reproduction number
Fraction initially susceptible

Notes: We calibrate the model at a daily frequency.
Table 1: Calibration

7.2

Results

We next turn to our quantitative results. As a simple benchmark, we begin with the basic
SIRD model and then turn to laissez-faire equilibrium and the social optimum.
7.2.1

Basic SIRD Model

Figure 3 plots the dynamics of the pandemic in the SIRD model, that is without any behavioral response, A(t) = a∗ = 1, under the assumption that a cure is not found. The top
panel shows the share of people susceptible in levels. The bottom panel shows the share
infected on a log scale. The pandemic unfolds rapidly even though only one out of one million individuals is initially infected. After several weeks, a sizable share of the population is
infected. The infection rate peaks after seven weeks above 31 percent. As a consequence of
the height of the peak, the benefits of herd immunity do not kick in before almost everyone
is sick. By 14 weeks into the infection, only 5.3 percent of the population remains susceptible
and 0.19% of the population has died, more than 600,000 people in a country the size of the
United States. Although the pandemic ends quickly, the cost of the disease is substantial.
18

share susceptible Ns
share infected Ni

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

10−1
10−2
10−3
10−4
10−5
day

Notes: We set A(t) to its optimal level absent disease, a∗ = 1 and use equations (1) and (2).

Figure 3: Basic SIRD Model.
Measured in utility units, it is −136.6, equivalent to a permanent reduction in social activity
to a = 0.819.
Of course, this model completely fails to capture the experience in places that did not
institute any restrictions on social activity. For instance, Sweden hit 1040 total cases on
March 15, 2020.7 One month later, this number rose By mid April, this number had risen
to about 11,927 confirmed cases despite the laissez-faire approach taken by the Swedish
government. In contrast, our calibrated SIRD model predicts an increase by a factor of
e0.3×30 , or more than 8000-fold, during this period. Likewise, the SafeGraph micro-data
document a remarkably uniform decline in individual social activity. The fact that this
decline happened across the board in the US despite the large differences in policies also
suggests that the basic SIRD model fails to capture a key aspect of this epidemic, namely
that individual behavior responds to the risk of infection.
7.2.2

Laissez-Faire Equilibrium

We thus next turn to the disease dynamics in our laissez-faire equilibrium, which are depicted
in Figure 4.8 The top two panels again depict the share of susceptible and infected. The
7
8

Retrieved from https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/country/sweden/.
Note that all the figures are conditional on no cure having been found.

19

difference between laissez-faire and the basic SIRD model is stark. Despite the government
not intervening at all, the peak infection rate is one tenth of the level in the SIRD model, 3.5
percent. In turn, the response of individual behavior substantially prolongs the epidemic,
with the infection rate staying elevated for a much longer time, albeit at a lower level. This
implies that the population reaches herd immunity at a far lower level of Ni , compared with
the SIRD model. Taking into account the possibility of a cure, in expectation just under 50
percent of people eventually get sick. Thus the expected death rate is about half as high as
in the model without a behavioral response.
The third panel shows that individuals reduce their social activity by as much as 40
percent. The fourth panel depicts the ratio of the effective reproduction number to the
fraction of susceptible people, Re (t)/Ns (t) on a double log scale.9 Recall that this is the
number of newly infected individuals for each infected person which would prevail if everyone
were susceptible for a given level of social activity A(t). This falls substantially, driving
down the doubling time for the disease, but remains strictly above 1. As a consequence,
the fact that Ni eventually starts falling is a consequence of the stock of susceptible people
becoming smaller. Putting this together, the total welfare loss in equilibrium is equivalent
to a permanent reduction in social activity to A = 0.854.
We note that the dynamics of social activity, A, under laissez-faire mirrors the behavior
of Ni . The reason is simply that there is little private incentives to lower social activity when
the risk of individual infection is negligible. As a consequence, individuals do not restrict
activity until infections are rampant.
Taken together, the internalized part of the disease risk substantially delays the “wave,”
lowers the peak infection rate, and slows infections to an extent that allows the population
to achieve a higher asymptotic susceptible share. In fact, as we show next, the laissez-faire
equilibrium dynamics are closer to the optimal dynamics than to the SIRD model. This
suggests that explicitly modeling the internalized dimension of disease outbreak is of first
order importance.
7.2.3

Optimal Policy

Figure 5 contrasts the laissez-faire with the optimal policy. Reflecting the external effects
of social activity, the key property of the optimal policy is delay. While peak infection in
the SIRD model occur after 49 days and the equilibrium behavioral response delays the
peak until 62 days have lapsed, the optimal policy delays it for 341 days. Because infections
increase more slowly, the peak level of infection is also far lower under the optimal policy,
9

On a double log scale, the vertical distance between two points y1 and y2 is proportional log(log y1 ) −
log(log y2 ).

20

share susceptible Ns
share infected Ni

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

0

50

100

150

200
days

250

300

350

10−2
10−3
10−4
10−5

social activity A

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

reproduction number Re
susceptible share Ns

0
2
1.1
1.01

Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. The second plot is drawn on a log scale and the fourth plot on a
double log scale.

Figure 4: Laissez-Faire equilibrium.

21

at 0.28 percent. We stress that this strong desire to “flatten the curve” is true in a model
without any explicit cost of peak-loading of infection rates, i.e. where κ is constant. A health
care externality would make the case for flattening the curve even stronger.
An optimal policy buys time for a cure. Asymptotically, a bit more than 1 − γ/β = 0.677
of the population will eventually get sick, assuming a cure is never developed. This reflects
the fact that activity will optimally asymptote back to a∗ . Taking into account the possibility
of a cure, however, reduces that to just 8.4 percent. Thus the expected death rate is one-sixth
as large under the optimal policy as in equilibrium. The resulting welfare loss is equivalent to
a permanent reduction in social activity to A = 0.907, significantly less than the equilibrium
reduction to 0.854. The welfare cost is also well below the cost of permanently suppressing
p
the disease by setting Re (t) = Ns (t), i.e. by setting A = γ/β = 0.568 until a cure is
found. The welfare cost of this policy is equivalent to permanently reducing social activity
to A = 0.870.
The optimal policy achieves delay by acting preemptively. The third panel in Figure 5
shows the degree of social distancing in laissez-faire and optimum. At the outbreak of
the disease, equilibrium behavior does not change because the risk of individual infection
is negligible. Optimal policy, however, immediately curtails social activity. The planner
recognizes that lowering the initial transmission rate buys time. In particular, the bottom
panel shows that the ratio of the effective reproduction number to the share of susceptible
individuals Re (t)/Ns (t) is far below its uncurtailed counterpart R0 (which corresponds to the
intercept of the laissez-faire time path). Even if a full outbreak is eventually inevitable, the
social gains from immediate social distancing are of first order because of discounting and
because of the hope for a cure. The cost, however, are of second order, since u0 (a∗ ) = 0.10
Despite the initial reduction in social activity, a remarkable feature of the optimal policy
is that social distancing is never extremely intense. The planner could, of course, push the
effective reproduction number Re (t) below the share of susceptible people Ns (t), ending the
disease, but he never chooses to do so, instead choosing values slightly above Ns (t). While
the stock of infected people Ni (t) eventually starts declining under the optimal policy, this is
a consequence of the fact that the stock of susceptible people Ns (t) falls substantially below
1, combined with a limited reduction in social activity A(t).
To gain some intuition for this observation, we note that social activity eventually needs
to return to its pre-pandemic level. The reason is that under any feasible policy, the share
of infected individuals must converge to zero.11 If A(t) were converging to a number smaller
10
In contrast, Alvarez, Argente and Lippi (2020) assume the economy without disease is in a corner and
so reductions in social activity, lockdowns in their words, have a first order cost.
11
Formally, we have that the sum of the number of recovered and deceased people evolve as (Nr0 (t) +
Nd0 (t)) = γNi (t) (equations 3 and 3). Since Nr (t) + Nd (t) is bounded above by 1, their sum must converge,

22

share susceptible Ns
share infected Ni

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400
days

500

600

700

10−2
10−3
10−4
10−5

social activity A

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

reproduction number Re
susceptible share Ns

0
2
1.1
1.01

Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. The second plot is drawn on a log scale and the fourth plot on a
double log scale.

Figure 5: Optimal Policy vs Laissez-Faire.

23

than a∗ = 1, there would be a first order gain from a temporary and small increase in A, while
the cost would be negligible if Ni (t) is sufficiently small. Thus long-runs social distancing
cannot be optimal.
Now suppose we suppress Re (t) below Ns (t) at some early time t. Doing this for a while
will reduce the infection rate to a negligible share of the population. But since the number
of infected people never reaches zero, any attempt to relax social distancing will quickly lead
to a reemergence of the disease, quickly undoing the effect of keeping Re (t) below Ns (t).
Thus setting Re (t) below Ns (t) only makes sense if the intent is to keep this policy in place
forever. But we have just argued that this is not optimal.
Finally, we discuss the shape of the recovery. We note that, under laissez-faire, social
activity is almost back to its pre-pandemic level after 2 years. This is not the case under
the optimal solution, which curtails activity for decades or until a cure is found. That is
the flip-side of delay: The optimal solution delays in the hope of finding a cure. If no cure
is found, herd immunity only builds very slowly and so restrictions on social activity must
persist far longer than under laissez-faire. These restrictions do disappear eventually, with
Re (t)/Ns (t) converging to R0 as the level of the susceptible population falls slightly below
1/R0 .
Overall, an important observation is that the planner achieves a delay in infections over
the first year of the pandemic without completely locking down the economy. The key instead
is an early and long-lasting reduction in social activity that is moderate in magnitude.

7.3

Revisiting the Evidence on Change in Individual Behavior

We briefly re-visit the quantitative evidence from SafeGraph from section 3. We note that
none of the targets we chose in calibrating our model were actually related to the response
of social activity to the Covid-19 outbreak. We do not take a stance on whether the hastily
implemented lockdowns and mobility restrictions are close to the social optimum. But we
believe that the response in individual behavior witnessed prior to implementation of any
policy measures should be picked up by the laissez-faire equilibrium.
Figures 1 and 2 show a decline of some 25-50% in terms of activity across our three
different metrics. We note that these metrics all have an inherent cardinality and so their
decline is quantitatively meaningful. This is well captured by our laissez-faire model which
suggests a decline of individual activity by 40% as can be seen in Figure 5.
Furthermore, we note that the model also captures the pace of the decline surprisingly
well. In the model, equilibrium social activity declines form 98% on day 20 to 63% on day
which requires Ni (t) converges to zero.

24

51. The contraction in the SafeGuard data was even faster. For example, Figure 1 shows
that POI visits fell from 98 percent on March 11 to 45 percent on March 20 as state and
local governments started to issue stay-at-home and shelter-in-place orders. The difference
might reflect a delayed understanding of the seriousness of the disease.
We complement this analysis with an exploration of aggregate data available from Google
at https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/ for Sweden. This data uses Google’s location
history to track mobility along various dimensions relative to a baseline. Sweden has arguably
been the Western country with the least restrictions on mobility and social activity throughout March 2020. The Swedish data currently cover the time period from February 23 to
April 5.
We restrict attention to the categories “Retail & recreation,” “Transit Stations,” and
“Workplace”. The data suggest a reduction of activity of about 25%, 39%, and 28% for
these three categories, respectively. This suggests that Swedes indeed internalize parts of
the risk associated with the disease and therefore reduced activity, in line with our model.
Like the US micro-data presented in section 3, the data squares up well with the laissez-faire
dynamics under our preferred model calibration, both in terms of the size and pace of the
decline.
We also note that we could have directly targeted this type of data in our calibration, in
particular to select a value for κ. That is, a natural approach would be to let the individual
response in behavior “reveal” the perceived cost of infection instead of relying on controversial
and noisy direct measures of the infection mortality rate, π, and the value of a statistical
life, v. However, as we show below, the responsiveness of the time path of A(t) to variation
in κ ≡ πv is limited and so we have opted with the direct measures. Nonetheless, we
believe that the response of behavior absent policy intervention can be a useful source of
information to reveal perceptions given the current level of uncertainty surrounding many
key parameters.

8

Robustness

In this section, we show the laissez-faire and optimal dynamics given perturbations to various
parameters. Given the large uncertainty around many of the key modeling parameters we
consider fairly large changes. We find that our main findings are robust to alternative
parameter choices. In particular, we find that a strong laissez-faire equilibrium reduction in
social activity; an immediate and persistent optimal reduction in social activity that only
disappears in the very long run; and with one notable exception, a limit in the extent of
social distancing such that the effective reproduction number Re (t) stays above the share of
25

susceptible individuals Ns (t).

8.1

Alternative Utility Function

In Figure 6, we modify the utility function to u(a) = − 12 (1−a)2 . This leaves u(1) = u0 (1) = 0
and also leaves u00 (1) unchanged. However, it implies less curvature in the utility function
and in particular that u0 (0) is finite. This modification reduces the marginal value of social
activity, and so both equilibrium and optimal social activity fall with this calibration. Still,
all of our takeaway messages hold with this calibration: optimal policy has an immediate
and sustained reduction in social activity, although the extent of it is limited and so the
effective reproduction number remains above the share of susceptible individuals.

8.2

Cost of Disease

This subsection shows the results for κ = 320, that is we double our baseline parameter value
of the expected cost of infection. For instance, this can be viewed as capturing a death rate
of π = 0.004 (compared with π = 0.002 in the baseline). We show the resulting dynamics
for optimum and laissez-faire in Figure 7.
Doubling the cost of infection cuts the peak equilibrium infection rate by more than half,
from 3.3 percent to 1.5 percent. The peak optimal infection rate declines by a larger percent,
although from a very low level of 0.276 percent to a negligible 0.014 percent. The optimal
policy delays a sizable outbreak for an extremely long time, effectively until a cure has been
found with very high probability. It does so by initially reducing social activity and then
continuing to suppress it to a level with Re (t) just above Ns (t) for decades. While not visible
in the figure, social activity is eventually allowed to return to normal and a fraction less than
γ/β of individuals remain disease free. We note of course that all of this again is conditional
on no cure being found, an exceedingly unlikely scenario.

8.3

Higher Duration of Infectivity and Higher R0

Some authors use a considerably longer duration of infectivity γ1 . For instance, Hall, Jones
1
and Klenow (2020) set γ = 18
. We follow them here but maintain the target of a 30 percent
1
daily growth rate in a world without social distancing. We therefore adjust β = 0.3 + 18
.
This gives a substantially higher basic reproduction number of R0 = 6.4.
We report the corresponding results in Figure 8. This has qualitatively little impact
on the results, but there are significant quantitative differences. Most noticeably, with a
much higher basic reproduction number, social distancing is less effective at reducing the
26

share susceptible Ns
share infected Ni

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400
days

500

600

700

10−2
10−3
10−4
10−5

social activity A

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

reproduction number Re
susceptible share Ns

0
2
1.1
1.01

Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. Only change: We assume the utility from social activity is u(a) =
− 12 (1 − a)2 . Dashed lines show the baseline calibration. The second plot is drawn on a log scale and the
fourth plot on a double log scale.

Figure 6: Optimal Policy vs Laissez-Faire with quadratic utility.

27

share susceptible Ns
share infected Ni

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400
days

500

600

700

10−2
10−3
10−4
10−5

social activity A

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

reproduction number Re
susceptible share Ns

0
2
1.1
1.01

Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. Only change: We set κ = 320 instead of κ = 160. Dashed lines show
the baseline calibration. The second plot is drawn on a log scale and the fourth plot on a double log
scale.

Figure 7: Optimal Policy vs Laissez-Faire with high cost of infection.

28

infection rate. The peak infection rate in equilibrium is substantially elevated. Even more
noticeably, optimal policy now allows for a substantial wave of infections, since the cost of
suppressing it is prohibitive. Conversely, both equilibrium and optimal policy see an even
larger contraction of social activity. In either case, optimal policy still keeps Re (t) > Ns (t),
as before.

8.4

Lower Cure Probability

We have so far assumed that the expected time until a cure is 1.5 years. Figure 9 shows
what happens if we double this to 3 years. The laissez-faire equilibrium dynamics are effectively the same, reflecting the fact that individuals are insensitive to the discount rate,
and difficulties in finding a cure are equivalent to a reduction in discounting. The dynamics
of the disease, however, differ sharply under the optimal policy. In particular, the planner
allows a substantial wave of infections to occur, so the expected number of sick (and hence
fatalities) rises much more quickly. This reflects a reduction in the benefits of delay.
Still, the path of optimal policy does not change qualitatively. Immediate and long-lasting
social distancing is optimal, only briefly interrupted by a more severe constraint on activity—
still with Re (t) > Ns (t)—at the peak of the infection. In particular, social distancing lasts
even once it appears that the share of susceptible people has reached a plateau.

8.5

Stock of Initially Infected

We have experimented with the stock of the initially infected for several reasons. First, one
might think that as the fraction of initially infected individuals becomes exceedingly small
one of our key policy lessons—that the optimal policy immediately curtails social activity
to buy time—no longer holds. This is indeed true in the limit: For Ni (0) small enough the
expected uncurtailed outbreak date is so far in the future that the (social) gains from social
distancing must vanish. However, suppose we start with Ni (0) = 1/7·109 , i.e. patient zero, a
natural lower bound on the initial seed. With β − γ = 0.3, in just 30 days Ni (t) exceeds
10−6 if there is no social distancing. The delay motive we have appealed to above therefore
remains quantitatively powerful.
Second, we have also substantially increased Ni (0) up to 1 percent. This could for
instance capture the situation in places where the Covid-19 appeared first, or it could capture
the situation in places where the initial policy response was botched or individuals did
not respond because of, say, false information. We plot the corresponding time paths for
equilibrium and optimum in Figure 10.

29

share susceptible Ns
share infected Ni

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400
days

500

600

700

10−1
10−2
10−3
10−4
10−5

social activity A

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

reproduction number Re
susceptible share Ns

0

2
1.1
1.01

Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. Only change: We set γ = 0.056 (instead of γ = 0.143) and β = 0.356
such that R0 = 6.4 (instead of 3.1). Dashed lines show the baseline calibration. The second plot is
drawn on a log scale and the fourth plot on a double log scale.

Figure 8: Optimal Policy vs Laissez-Faire with long duration of infectivity.

30

share susceptible Ns
share infected Ni

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400
days

500

600

700

10−2
10−3
10−4
10−5

social activity A

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

reproduction number Re
susceptible share Ns

0
2
1.1
1.01

0.67
Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. Only change: We set δ = 0.33
365 (instead of 365 ). Dashed lines show
the baseline calibration. The second plot is drawn on a log scale and the fourth plot on a double log
scale.

Figure 9: Optimal Policy vs Laissez-Faire with low probability of cure.

31

The qualitative patterns are largely unchanged but the optimal policy acts more aggressively. An important observation, shown in the bottom panel of the figure, is that in this
case optimal policy suppresses social activity for the first 67 days to such an extent that
Re (t) falls below Ns (t); this cannot be shown on the double log scale. As a consequence of
the high initial stock of infections, the planner has less room to delay the wave of infections
and so drives down the stock of infections from the outset. Nonetheless, optimal policy
monotonically relaxes social distancing, ultimately relying on a reduction in the share of
susceptible individuals for the continued decline in infections. The equilibrium time path, in
turn, remains largely unchanged. Starting with more infections just shifts it ahead in time.

9
9.1

Next Steps
Heterogeneity

Several key dimensions of heterogeneity come to mind. In particular, a key feature of the
Covid-19 pandemic is the case fatality rate by age: Individuals age 65 and older seem to
have a far higher fatality rate than younger ones. At the same time, one might argue that
they have a smaller cost associated with a reduced social activity since they are primarily
retired.
We believe that our current framework can naturally and easily be extended to accommodate these dimensions of heterogeneity. With k types of people, we would need to solve
a system of 2k differential equations in equilibrium. Assuming a utilitarian social planner
that can separately choose the level of social activity for each type, there would be a corresponding system of 2k differential equations describing the optimal policy. We are currently
working on that extension.

9.2

Antibody Tests

We have assumed that everyone knows when their infection ends. In reality, few people are
currently tested, and so many recovered people cannot be sure whether they were sick. We
can capture this by separating the recovered state into two categories, depending on whether
the individual is aware they were sick. Someone who does not know they have recovered from
Covid-19 must choose the same level of social activity as the susceptible and infected, given
their lack of information. In this environment, antibody testing may be useful for letting
recovered people know that they are recovered. This has the dual benefit of allowing those
individuals to return to a normal level of social activity and of discouraging social activity
by those who are still susceptible or infected.
32

share susceptible Ns
share infected Ni

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400
days

500

600

700

10−2
10−3
10−4
10−5

social activity A

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

reproduction number Re
susceptible share Ns

0
2
1.1
1.01

Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. Only change: We set Ni (0) = 10−2 instead of Ni (0) = 10−6 . This
also reduces the initial value of Ns (0) to 0.985 instead of 0.9999985. Dashed lines show the baseline
calibration. The second plot is drawn on a log scale and the fourth plot on a double log scale.

Figure 10: Optimal Policy vs Laissez-Faire with higher stock of initially infected.

33

9.3

Vaccines

We have so far assumed that at a random future date, a cure will end all costs associated
with the disease. This is an unlikely scenario. More plausible is the gradual roll-out of a
vaccine that shifts some people from susceptible to recovered without enduring an infection.
To the extent the vaccine provides imperfect coverage, even a 100 percent vaccination rate
will leave some people vulnerable to future infections, and potentially slow the recovery in
social activity.

10

Conclusion

This paper uses standard dynamic optimal choice tools from economics to integrate privately
optimal behavior and policy analysis into an epidemiological model. Our quantitative exercises reveal several robust patterns: Even in laissez-faire, individuals sharply reduce social
activity due to risk of infection gradually. However, an optimal policy immediately curtails
social activity immediately and delays the full outbreak to buy time. But even the optimal
policy lets the disease eventually run its course: If no cure is found a large number of people
eventually get infected. The framework we develop is general and tractable: Optimal behavior and policy are encoded in an additional set of differential equations that can jointly
be solved with the epidemiological block. We therefore view the tools offered here as a natural building block to explore the role of various additional features of Covid-19 and their
interplay with optimal policy.

34

References
Alvarez, Fernando, David Argente, and Francesco Lippi, “A Simple Planning Problem for COVID-19 Lockdown,” March 2020.
Atkeson, Andrew, “What will be the economic impact of COVID-19 in the US? Rough
estimates of disease scenarios,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
2020.
Barro, Robert J, José F Ursua, and Joanna Weng, “The Coronavirus and the Great
Influenza Epidemic-Lessons from the coronavirus potential effects on mortality and economic activity,” 2020.
Budish, Eric, “R < 1 as an Economic Constraint: Can We “Expand the Frontier” in the
Fight Against Covid-19?,” April 2020.
Dewatripont, Mathias, Michel Goldman, Eric Muraille, and Jean-Philippe Platteau, “Rapid identification of workers immune to COVID-19 and virus-free: A priority
to restart the economy,” Technical Report, Discussion paper, Universit Libre de Bruxelles
2020.
Diamond, Peter A., “Aggregate demand management in search equilibrium,” Journal of
Political Economy, 1982, 90 (5), 881–894.
and Eric Maskin, “An Equilibrium Analysis of Search and Breach of Contract, I: Steady
States,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 1979, 10 (1), 282–316.
Dong, Ensheng, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner, “An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time,” The Lancet infectious diseases, 2020.
Eichenbaum, Martin S., Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt, “The Macroeconomics of Epidemics,” April 2020.
Garibaldi, Pietro, Espen R. Moen, and Christopher A. Pissarides, “Modelling
contacts and transitions in the SIR epidemics model,” Technical Report, CEPR Covid
Economics Working Paper, Issue 5 2020.
Glover, Andrew, Jonathan Heathcote, Dirk Krueger, and Jose Victor Rios-Rull,
“Health versus Wealth: On the Distributional Effects of Controlling a Pandemic,” Technical Report, Working Paper 2020.

35

Greenstone, Michael and Vishan Nigam, “Does Social Distancing Matter,” March
2020.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Philipp Kircher, Cezar Santos, and Michèle Tertilt, “An
equilibrium model of the African HIV/AIDS epidemic,” Econometrica, 2019, 87 (4), 1081–
1113.
Hall, Robert E., Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow, “Trading off Consumption
and COVID-19 Deaths,” 2020.
Jones, Callum, Thomas Philippon, and Venky Venkateswaran, “Optimal Mitigation
Policies in a Pandemic: Social Distancing and Working from Home,” 2020.
Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Gianluca Violante, “Pandemics According to
HANK,” Technical Report, Working Paper 2020.
Keppo, Jussi, Marianna Kudlyak, Elena Quercioli, Lones Smith, and Andrea
Wilson, “For Whom the Bell Tolls: Avoidance Behavior at Breakout in COVID19,”
Technical Report, Working Paper 2020.
Kermack, William Ogilvy and Anderson G McKendrick, “A contribution to the
mathematical theory of epidemics,” Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A,
Containing papers of a mathematical and physical character, 1927, 115 (772), 700–721.
Kremer, Michael and Charles Morcom, “The effect of changing sexual activity on HIV
prevalence,” Mathematical biosciences, 1998, 151 (1), 99–122.
Krueger, Dirk, Harald Uhlig, and Taojun Xie, “Macroeconomic Dynamics and Reallocation in an Epidemic,” Technical Report, CEPR Covid Economics Working Paper,
Issue 5 2020.
Lauer, Stephen A, Kyra H Grantz, Qifang Bi, Forrest K Jones, Qulu Zheng,
Hannah R Meredith, Andrew S Azman, Nicholas G Reich, and Justin Lessler,
“The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from publicly reported
confirmed cases: estimation and application,” Annals of internal medicine, 2020.
Piguillem, Facundo and Liyan Shi, “The optimal covid-19 quarantine and testing policies,” Technical Report, Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance (EIEF) 2020.

36

